Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Critical social science perspectives on transformations
to sustainability$
Eleanor Fisher1, Eduardo Brondizio2 and Emily Boyd3
This article introduces a special issue on the contribution of
social science to addressing transformations to sustainability.
Articles underline the importance of embracing theoretically
rooted, empirically informed, and collaboratively generated
knowledge to address sustainability challenges and
transformative change. Emphasis is placed on the role of the
social sciences in elaborating on the politicisation and
pluralisation of transformation processes and outcomes,
helping situate, frame, reflect and generate societal action,
while acknowledging the complexity of societal transformation
in different contexts.
Addresses
1
Nordic Africa Institute, Box 1703, Uppsala, SE-795147, Sweden
2

Department of Anthropology, Indiana University Bloomington, Student
Building 130701 E. Kirkwood Avenue, Bloomington, IN 47405-7100,
USA
3
Lund University Centre for Sustainability Studies, Lund University, Box
170SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden
Corresponding author: Fisher, Eleanor (eleanor.fisher@nai.uu.se)

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160
This review comes from a themed issue on Transformations to
sustainability: Critical social science perspectives
Edited by Eleanor Fisher, Emily Boyd and Eduardo Brondizio
For a complete overview see the Issue
Available online 8th March 2022
Received: 24 December 2021; Accepted: 14 February 2022
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2022.101160
1877-3435/ã 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Introduction
As the international community confronts the urgency of
global environmental challenges, calls have grown for

fundamental transformative change to how we live on
the planet and approach the systems that sustain our lives,
recognising that this needs to occur at a scale, degree and
urgency that renders business-as-usual untenable for
sustainable societies [1–6]. Moreover, fuelled by how
global inequalities shape the unequal impacts of climate
change and the Covid-19 pandemic [7], there is increasing attention to the need for transformation to incorporate
principles of equity and justice [8,9,10]. This underlines the value of developing new visions and narratives of
plausible futures to guide attitudes, choices, policies, and
actions [11].
We approach this Special Issue from the premise that the
social sciences (and humanities) can contribute critical
perspectives for understanding how transformative societal change towards sustainability can be addressed. We
view this as going beyond identification of toolkit-style
solutions to environmental crisis to provide context, framings, approaches, and reflection on societal transformation
[12]. As the climate and biodiversity crises and the Covid19 pandemic all demonstrate, scientific facts have to be
connected politically to how sustainability is articulated
socially, culturally, economically, and environmentally in
different contexts [13]. This requires problematizing how
global environmental challenges are framed and perceived, identifying opportunities for transformation,
and understanding what agency and capacities different
groups of people have to respond to change.
This Special Issue brings together articles from eleven
three-year projects funded in 2018 under the NORForum
research
programme
FACE/Belmont
‘Transformations to Sustainability’ (T2S).1 Table 1 presents a list of article titles, and associated project names
and acronyms, summarising the approach to each project.2
In addition, our annotated bibliography includes studies
from a precursor programme.3 The ‘Transformations to
Sustainability’ programme has the motivation to support
‘sustainability research . . . [that is] . . . based on good
understanding of how societal transformation comes

$
Given their role as Guest Editors, Eleanor Fisher, Eduardo Brondizio and Emily Boyd had no involvement in the peer-review of this article and has
no access to information regarding its peer-review. Responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated Opha Pauline Dube.
1
NORFACE brings together national research funding agencies in Europe. The Belmont Forum is a partnership of funding organizations, national
science councils, and regional consortia committed to transdisciplinary science for understanding, mitigating and adapting to global environmental
change.
2
Information on each project and links to project webpages can be found here: https://t2sresearch.org/projects/.
3
Between 2014–2019 three transformative knowledge networks were funded: ACKOWL_EJ, the Academic-Activist Co-Produced Knowledge for
Environmental Justice’ project, PATHWAYS, the Transformative Pathways to Sustainability project, and T-LEARNING, The Transgressive
Learning Project. See https://transformationstosustainability.org/.

www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

2 Transformations to sustainability

Table 1
Summary of approaches to transformations to sustainability: T2S Programme (Belmont Forum/NORFACE)
(i) Research approaches and
methods

(ii) Approach to T2S

(iii) Challenges and opportunities

(iv) Attention to scale

Project: Transforming Unsustainable Pathways in Agricultural Frontiers (TRUEPATH)
Article: ‘Fostering bottom up actor coalitions for transforming complex rural territorial pathways’, Bastiaensen et al.
Agricultural frontiers – Nicaragua.
Territorial pathways framework.
Dominant territorial pathway
Recognises multi-scale processes;
Participatory development,
development sociology,
Emergent, open-ended, involving
challenges transformation; territorial focuses on local action situated
economics, agrarian systems.
contested socio-political
alternatives identified.
within regional context.
processes.
Project: Localizing Land Registration in Conflict Affected Areas (SusTenSusPeace)
Article: Promoting land tenure security for sustainable peace: lessons on the politics of transformation, van Leeuwen et al.
Land registration in conflict-affected settings – Burundi and Democratic Republic of Congo.
Critical development studies,
Political, contested claim making
Elite capture of transformation
Focuses on local action within
political ecology and legal/
processes stimulating unintended politics. Localisation stimulates
national contexts.
political anthropology.
development outcomes.
opportunities for social justice.
Project: Amazonian Governance to Enable Transformations to Sustainability (AGENTS)
Article: Making place-based sustainability initiatives visible in the Brazilian Amazon, Brondizio et al.
Initiatives for sustainable forest management in the Amazon – Brazil, Peru, and Bolivia.
Participatory development,
Place-based initiatives as forces for Governance works against
geospatial analysis, institutions change within transformative
amplification/replication. Potential
for collective action.
pathways, with (dis)continuities.
for transformation.

Recognises historical legacies and
cross-scale interactions; focuses
on local, national, regional levels.

Project: Towards Convivial Conservation (CON-VIVA)
Article: Transformation beyond conservation: how critical social science can contribute to a radical agenda in biodiversity conservation, Massarella
et al.
Conservation, human – wildlife relations – Brazil, Finland, Tanzania, and USA.
Combines political ecology and
Radical alternatives and knowledge Separating conservation from
Multi-scaled; local action is situated
justice theory.
pluralisation for equity and justice. political economy restricts T2S.
within global framing.
Politicises environmental issues.
Challenges dominant perspectives.
Project: Transformation to Groundwater Sustainability (T2SGS)
Article: Transformations to groundwater sustainability: from individuals and pumps to communities and aquifers, Zwarteveen et al.
Groundwater sustainability in relation to agriculture - Algeria, Chile, India, Morocco, Peru, Syria, Tanzania, and USA.
Anchors T2S in collective action
Inequality in science-dominated
Multi-scale, with emphasis on local
Anti-colonial critique, feminism.
Ethnography, hydrogeology,
and practices of care, emphasizing solutions. Pluralisation widens
action.
engineering, action research.
scope of grassroots initiatives.
possibilities for transformation.
Project: Migration, Transformation and Sustainability (MISTY)
Article: The migration-sustainability paradox: transformations in mobile worlds, Franco Gavonel et al.
Human migration dynamics, sustainability - Bangladesh, Belgium, Ghana, Mozambique, Netherlands, and USA.
Human geography,
Multi-scale; local cases are situated
Migration transition dynamics;
Inequalities challenged through
macroeconomics, demography, capital asset based framework on wellbeing and equality
in national contexts, with attention
migration studies.
sustainable development.
improvements.
to macro-level (global/regional).
Project: Pathways to Sustainability in Marginal Environments (TAPESTRY)
Article: Transformation as praxis: responding to climate change uncertainties in marginal environments in South Asia, Mehta et al.
Climate change uncertainties in vulnerable coastal areas of Mumbai, the Sundarbans and Kutch – India and Bangladesh.
Transformation as praxis;
Critical development/science
Challenges of marginalisation;
Multi-scale, with emphasis on
technology studies, political
transformative alliances work to
opportunities through individual
bottom-up action within national
ecology, history, GIS,
reconfigure development.
agency and collective action.
and regional contexts.
ethnography.
Project: Intellectual Property in Sustainability Transitions (IPACST)
Article: Sustainability transitions in manufacturing: the role of intellectual property, Eppinger et al.
Intellectual property models, manufacturing - Sweden, Germany, India, and UK.
Interdisciplinarity informed by
Intellectual Property Rights
Lack of partnership, weak diffusion Multi-scale; firm and crossengineering, intellectual property systems, tools unlock sustainable create barriers. Collaboration and
industry; industrialized and
rights law, and sustainability
innovation in transition.
joint innovation facilitate change.
developing countries.
science.
Project: Governance of Sociotechnical Transformations (GoST)
Article: The governance of sociotechnical transformations to sustainability. Beck et al.
Sociotechnical transformations in energy systems, agriculture, and urban digital infrastructures - Germany, India, Kenya, UK, and US.
Imaginaries of sustainable futures
Multi-scale; focus on selected
Science and technology studies, Sociotechnical imaginaries (STI)
sociology, environmental politics framework; non-linear pathways for enable or limit scope and spaces of sectors within globally
and governance.
transformation alternatives.
political action for transformation.
interconnected national contexts.

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

www.sciencedirect.com

Critical social science perspectives on transformations to sustainability Fisher, Brondizio and Boyd 3

Table 1 (Continued )
(i) Research approaches and
methods

(ii) Approach to T2S

(iii) Challenges and opportunities

(iv) Attention to scale

Project: Sustainable Flood Risk Governance for Urban Resilience (WATERPROOFING DATA)
Article: The role of data in transformations to sustainability: a critical research agenda, Porto de Albuquerque et al.
Role of data in flood risk management - Brazil, Germany, and UK.
Geography, GIS/urban analytics, Transformation pathways
Barriers from power asymmetries
Multi-scale; frames attention to
media and development studies, incorporate data innovations, within (etc.). Data-enabled pathways
different actors and types of data at
data science, critical pedagogy. socio-material processes.
catalyse and inform change.
macro, meso, and micro scales.
Sustainability Transformations in Artisanal and Small-scale Gold Mining: Multi-Actor and Trans-Regional Perspectives (GOLD MATTERS)
Article: Transforming matters: sustaining gold lifeways in artisanal and small-scale mining, Fisher et al.
Artisanal and small-scale gold mining – Brazil, Burkina Faso, French Guiana, Ghana, Guinea, Suriname, and Uganda.
Anthropology, development
Social - material encounters
Political and structural barriers to
Multi-scale, but emphasis on local
studies, GIS, mining engineering, stimulate transformation in
change. Locally situated practice
action within national and regional
and visual arts.
association with technology.
generates transformative action.
contexts.
Source: Authors, information drawn from articles in special issue v.49 and from https://t2sresearch.org/.

about and how – if at all – it can be initiated, fostered,
accelerated and steered towards ends that are at the same
time ecologically sound, economically viable and socially
just’.4 All eleven articles describe projects that are transdisciplinary, led by a social scientist, and developed in
collaboration with partners within the Americas, Africa,
Europe, and/or Asia.
Against this background, this Special Issue sets the stage
for a range of social science perspectives on transformation, contributing to an examination of what transformation looks like in different contexts. Contributors were
asked to address: ‘What combination of theoretical orientation, analytical perspective, and research practices have
guided your project’s approach to transformation to sustainability?’ In keeping with the aims and scope of this
journal, articles provide a concise review of a subject field
or issue, in some cases including illustrative examples to
contextualize the literature or situate the project within a
regional historical context.
Next, we first turn to provide a brief overview of different
schools of thought on sustainability transitions/transformations in order to situate the conceptual orientation of
the articles within a broad field. Second, we reflect on how
articles address transformations to sustainability. Finally,
we conclude with observations on the emerging contribution of critical social science, with the potential to
contribute plural social science perspectives to transdisciplinary research on transformations to sustainability.

Overview of schools of thought on transition/
transformation
There is a burgeoning literature on transformation from
different schools of thought within the social sciences and
allied disciplines [14,15,16,17,18–20]. While there is
agreement that transformation involves fundamental
change that is non-linear and non-teleological, what is
4

See: https://t2sresearch.org/about/.

www.sciencedirect.com

considered transformational – processes, characteristics,
outcomes – and how transformation arises, or indeed can
be recognized, is debated [15]. This is important because
different ways of understanding transformation influence
the identification of new insights, and what policies and
actions can be advocated [21].
Across the literature, a distinction is apparent between
‘sustainability transitions’ and ‘sustainability transformations’ (or ‘transformations to sustainability’), with
discussion over whether they are competing or complementary concepts [22]. We view this distinction as part of
a broad epistemic terrain shaping contemporary thinking
and do not intend to debate the utility of one expression
over another. Instead, we will proceed by providing a
brief overview of schools of thought associated with these
concepts, turning first to sustainability transitions scholarship and then to sustainability transformations
scholarship.
Predicated on recognizing the interdependence of people
and nature, scholarship on social-ecological systems
informs the first school of thought for framing transitions.
Here we can identify two strands: on resilience, and on
institutional analysis and development. Thinking on
resilience has roots within ecological science from at least
the 1970s [23]. Over a fifty-year period, resilience thinking has developed significantly, incorporating an interlinked focus on society and ecology as intertwined and coevolving, building an understanding of the fast changing
dynamics of tipping points and planetary boundaries [24–
26], and encompassing the value of complexity based
approaches [27]. The influence of the political economist
Elinor Ostrom helped broaden social-ecological systems
analysis in the 1990s [28–30]. Ostrom [28] proposed
Institutional Analysis and Development (IAD) as a
‘multi-level nested framework for analysing outcomes
achieved in social-ecological systems’ (p. 420). In her
view, applications for the framework include helping to
identify factors that may affect the likelihood of, for
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

4 Transformations to sustainability

instance, particular policies enhancing sustainability in
one collective action situation around a natural resource
and not others.
Building on this rich theoretical heritage, studies include
consideration of how resilience at different scales encompasses both adaptation within current development trajectories and the crossing of thresholds into new development trajectories when old systems become untenable
[31,32]. Research also examines the unanticipated and
negative consequences of resilience, with ‘lock in’ generating barriers to sustainability transformation [33]. Parallel social science perspectives likewise provide critique
of resilience as an obstacle to development and to transformation [34,35].
Scrutiny of how social and ecological ‘feedbacks’ can
reinforce one another to ‘lock’ a system into an undesirable state places attention on the value of ‘disruption’ for
producing greater environmental sustainability and
human wellbeing, highlighting the importance of
women’s empowerment, of co-management, and of
indigenous knowledge [36,37]. This is seen in the
application of ‘Transformation-Labs (T-Labs)’, a methodology for generating innovative approaches to transforming social-ecological systems [21,38,39].
Shocks linked to disruption also provide an entry point
for investigation of whether and under which conditions
socio-political change stimulates transformation in natural resource governance, with capacity for success dependent on ‘cognitive, structural and agency related capacities throughout all phases of the transformation’ [40]
(p. 11).
In examining the unanticipated consequences of resilience for transformation, Olsson et al. [33] counter assertions that resilience theory cannot contribute to addressing sustainability transformations, including associated
power relations, arguing it is a misperception that resilience theory is biased towards persistence, rather than
transformation. They emphasise the need for theoretical
integration and collaboration, notably through linkages
between social-ecological systems resilience and sociotechnical transitions thinking.
This prompts us to turn to a parallel school of thought on
sustainability transitions that emerged in the Netherlands
in the 1990s, namely that associated with the Sustainability
Transitions Research Network [17,20]. Instead of resilience theory’s emphasis on inter-twinned social-ecological
systems, a core concern for this group of researchers is the
co-evolution of society and technology, with technology
used as an ‘entry point’ to wider systems [16]. With roots
in science, technology and innovation studies, drawing too
from evolutionary and neo-institutional economics, transitions scholarship considers co-evolving social, institutional,
technological and economic changes within complex
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

systems. Two frameworks are ‘Transition Management’
(TM) and the ‘Multi-Level Perspective’ (MLP) [16,41].
In advocating for a MLP approach to sustainability transitions, Geels [16] argues it provides an integrative
approach that encompasses transitions in the socio-technical systems (transport, energy, agro-food, etc.) that provide
a basis for societal functions, and which therefore require
fundamental change.
Geels [16] and Köhler et al. [17] counter criticisms
levelled at socio-technical transitions scholarship that
weak attention is paid to power, politics, culture, and
conflict, and that emphasis on what Geels [16] refers to
as ‘distribution systems’, disregards social sustainability
(poverty, labour conditions, etc.) and the structural roots
of inequality, with capitalism treated as a ‘landscape
factor’ for socio-technical transitions [42]. A body of
recent research, particularly on the energy transition, also
challenges such criticisms [43,44,45].
Echoing Olsson et al.’s [33] earlier call for conceptual
pluralism, urban sustainability scholars propose a socialecological-technical-systems (SETS) approach that
bridges thinking on social-ecological systems and on
socio-technical transitions respectively [9,46,47].
SETS incorporates the significance of technological
mediation of human-environment relationships, translated across fields of research for a pluralistic understanding of how different domains interact [57]. For example,
using the concept of a ‘good Anthropocene,’ McPhearson
et al. [9] argue for five principles to act as preconditions
for development that is just, equitable, resilient and
sustainable. These five principles are rethinking growth,
efficiency, state, commons, and justice for systems-led
transformation, with interconnections considered fundamental to building innovations that can drive global-scale
change. (C.f. the Earth Systems Governance Framework
(ESGF) [48]).
We turn to thinking on sustainability transformations and
note that distinct schools of thought are harder to delineate, although the influence of qualitative social science
traditions within human geography, political ecology,
political science, development studies, and social anthropology are apparent. To be pragmatic, we will highlight
three lines of thinking: on sustainability pathways, on
transformative adaptation, and on social movements; we
illustrate the latter with reference to initiatives in the
Global South.
Research on the politics of sustainability that has
emerged from the STEPS Centre hosted at the Institute
of Development Studies (IDS) and Science Policy
Research Unit (SPRU) at the University of Sussex and
their global networks, has led to the development of a
perspective on transformations captured within a pathways approach to sustainability [49–51]. This builds on a
www.sciencedirect.com

Critical social science perspectives on transformations to sustainability Fisher, Brondizio and Boyd 5

legacy of work on participation, power and sustainability,
bringing together development studies and science technology studies (STS). Thinking on sustainability pathways places emphasis on challenging the power structures
that perpetuate inequality, with sustainability the subject
of plural knowledge framings and multi-actor perspectives that shape choices and pathways for action. This
includes transdisciplinary research on the co-construction
of transformative pathways to sustainability, methodologically incorporating T-Labs to develop innovative
responses to social-ecological problems [21,52–54].5
Thinking on sustainability from development scholars
has been combined with research on planetary boundaries
by resilience scholars [55]. Recent work has placed
emphasis on theoretical and methodological pluralism
to be equipped for transformative change [21,56],
including bringing together understandings of structural
processes with those of unruly, context-specific change to
envisage radically different futures within post-pandemic
transformations [56].
A second body of transformations scholarship, namely on
transformative adaptation, principally in relation to climate change, also pays attention to the underlying social
and political structures that produce marginalization and
inequality, shifting emphasis away from adaption within
the status quo to transformational change that challenges
the structural roots of vulnerability [57,58,59,60,61,62].
For example, Pelling [58] proposes a framework for
empirically analysing choices related to resilience (stability), transition (incremental change), and transformation
(new rights claims and changes in political regimes).
Leach et al. likewise proposes that adaptive challenges
require choices linked to new ways of viewing problems
and solutions. This leads them to identify three ‘spheres
of transformation’ – the personal, the political, and the
practical – which incorporate the need to recognize
beliefs, values and worldviews, and to acknowledge this
is political, involving validation of social norms and legitimation of forms of governance, in order to encapsulate
what is desirable and achievable within practical
strategies.
Thinking on sustainability pathways brings issues of
power and equity to the fore; there is also emphasis
on lives and livelihoods in the Global South. Nevertheless, one might counter – drawing from transitions perspectives presented above – that this orientation is at the
expense of the well-grounded understanding of ecology
and natural systems at different scales, as found in
resilience scholarship, or attention to the systems that
5
The ‘Transformative Pathways to Sustainability’ project was set up
as a transformative knowledge network by the International Social
Science Council with funding from SIDA, acting as a precursor to the
eleven projects discussed in this editorial. See https://
transformationstosustainability.org/.

www.sciencedirect.com

govern the socio-technical dimensions of modern life, as
found in transitions scholarship. This leads to a criticism
that while contextually based studies on sustainability
pathways can be invaluable for understanding local
complexity, weaknesses emerge with regard to framing
issues of scale, uncertainty and global environmental
tipping points.
A final area contributing to thinking on sustainability
transformations, relates to perspectives on social activism
in the Global South that give attention to different
epistemologies on sustainability [37] and to post-humanist thinking on ways of being in the world [63]. These
perspectives inform environmental justice movements
and radical critiques of development, including challenges to dominant notions of sustainability and transformation [45,64,65]. Concepts such as Buen Vivir (South
America) and Ubuntu (Southern Africa) provide alternatives to dominant world views about human wellbeing,
that is, foregrounding a wider set (than income, education, and longevity) of material, non-material, and contextual conditions underlying not only livelihood circumstances and opportunities, but different ways of
experimenting and knowing the world, and thus what
should be transformed, why and for whom [63,64,66].
These orientations demonstrate how transformative alternatives are not only there to be imagined for the future,
but exist already within peoples’ lived experience and can
offer valuable counterpoints to dominant perspectives on
transformative change.
This overview has highlighted how many different perspectives have emerged from different bodies of scholarship to inform thinking on sustainability transition/transformation within the social sciences. One challenge is
moving from a high level of abstraction to ground understanding of transformations to sustainability within
empirical research and practical action, in order to build
learning on the contribution of social science for addressing real world and rapidly evolving sustainability challenges. With this in view, we turn to focus on the eleven
articles in this Special Issue.

Transformations to sustainability:
approaches, opportunities and challenges at
different scales
Articles to this special issue focus on ‘transformations to
sustainability’ by addressing different sustainability challenges, as indicated in Table 1. Conceptual pluralism is
apparent in how transformation is addressed, nevertheless, with exceptions [75,76], articles lean towards
transformations scholarship and away from transitions
scholarship (Overview of schools of thought on transition/
transformation). Bearing this in mind, we focus on two
main areas. Firstly, approaches taken to research on
transformations to sustainability, including the social
science informing the research (Table 1, i-ii); and,
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

6 Transformations to sustainability

secondly, identification of opportunities and challenges
for addressing transformations to sustainability, including
attention to scale (Table 1, iii–iv).

Approaching transformation
Surveying the articles (Table 1), it is clear how wideranging is the social science, with orientations including:
political ecology; structuration theory; environmental and
social justice; science and technology studies; collective
action theory; an actor-oriented approach; participation;
action research; institutional bricolage; and feminist, anticolonial and subaltern critiques.
Bastiaensen et al. [67], van Leeuwen et al. [68], Brondizio et al. [69], Massarella et al. [70], Zwarteveen et al.
[71], Mehta et al. [72], and Fisher et al. [73] address
sustainability challenges in the Global South. They have
a development orientation and encompass how colonialism, capitalism, and development or conservation shape
sustainability challenges. Issues of social justice are prominent. Franco Gavonel et al. [74], Eppinger et al. [75],
Beck et al. [76], and Porto de Albuquerque et al. [77]
lean away from a development orientation, framing analysis within a global or sectoral perspective, or according to
specific expertise (intellectual property regimes, data
innovations).
Informed by understanding of agrarian systems and
development, Bastiaensen et al. [67] consider how
within agrarian frontiers of Nicaragua transformative
pathways can emerge from power-laden interactions,
framed by dominant ideas, social structures and ‘rulesin-use’. Van Leeuwen et al. [68] use critical development studies and anthropology to consider how land
registration (Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
Congo) depoliticises inherently political choices, with
transformation generating unexpected outcomes.
Drawing on approaches to collective action and participation, Brondizio et al. [69] address how place-based
initiatives involving individual and collective action have
roles in promoting regional sustainability in the Amazon.
Combining political ecology and justice theory, drawing
too from post-humanist thinking (Overview of schools of
thought on transition/transformation), Massarella et al. [70]
focus on biodiversity conservation (Brazil, Finland, Tanzania, USA) to consider how the social sciences can
politicise and pluralise conservation debates while facilitating transformative alternatives.
Zwarteveen et al. [71] focus on groundwater and agricultural intensification (Africa, Middle East, India, USA)
to anchor transformations to sustainability within collective action linked to forms of care, away from government
efforts to control individual behaviour. Mehta et al. [72],
debate how transformation can be conceptualized ‘from
below’ in marginal environments of India and Bangladesh
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

marked by climate uncertainties, proposing the notion of
transformation as praxis within bottom-up change.
Finally, Fisher et al. [73] address precarity, heterogeneity and the politics of artisanal and small-scale gold
mining (Africa, South America) to challenge dominant
legalistic approaches that ignore the social-material relationships and role of technology in stimulating transformative change.
Franco Gavonel et al. [74] situate global human migration in relation to migration transition dynamics, building on theories of migration as social transformation and
as development in research seated within human geography but informed by macroeconomics, demography,
development, and migration studies. In contrast, Eppinger et al. [75] focus on intellectual property rights (IPR)
in manufacturing. Their interdisciplinary thinking on
sustainability innovation within socio-technical transitions reflects the influence of IPR legal studies, engineering, and sustainability science. Beck et al. [76],
with a focus on sociotechnical transformations in agriculture, energy systems and urban infrastructure, are
informed by scholarship in science and technology studies, using a ‘Socio-Technical Imaginaries (STI)
framework’ to position science and technology in relation to political power and to governance. Finally, Porto
de Albuquerque et al. [77] broaden perspectives on the
role of data for enabling transformations with an application to flood risk management, adopting an interdisciplinary approach that draws on geography, media studies, GIS, social data science, critical pedagogy and
development studies.

Opportunities and challenges in regional
contexts at different scales
The eleven articles (Table 1, iii–iv) grapple with, on the
one hand, complex non-deliberative transformations and,
on the other hand, how to generate action to stimulate
sustainability transformations. In the process, issues of
equity and justice are foregrounded regarding for whom
desirable sustainability outcomes should be realised.
Given this ‘conceptual grappling’, we see innovation in
how the social sciences can help researchers define their
locus of concern. In several instances, this echoes thinking on sustainability pathways (Overview of schools of
thought on transition/transformation).
To illustrate, Mehta et al. [72] propose the notion of
‘patches of transformation’ ‘sites and exemplars amidst
largely unsustainable processes where hybrid alliances
and their innovation initiatives, reimagine sustainable
development and inspire transformative societal changes
that can be scaled up and out’. In comparison, Bastiaensen et al. [67] focus on ‘territorial pathways’ to ‘side with
evolving co-created sustainability perspectives built
from multiple entry points by innovative actor-coalitions, often involving previously excluded or invisible
www.sciencedirect.com

Critical social science perspectives on transformations to sustainability Fisher, Brondizio and Boyd 7

groups’. While Fisher et al. [73] take the notion of ‘gold
lifeways’ to reflect on the ‘unruly edges’ of gold extraction, giving expression to its situated, heterogeneous
character. These examples of how articles seek to
develop plausible accounts of situated action within
large-scale transformations lean towards middle range
theory, in the sense of seeking a ‘middle ground between
a universalist explanation and the need for empirical
contextualization . . . based on thick, data-rich analysis’
[78,79]. Here, arguably, this contrasts with research
framed according to meta-level unifying transition/transformation models, such as SETS [56], ESGF [67],
and an MLP [16] (Overview of schools of thought on
transition/transformation).
A ‘bottom up’ or ‘situated’ locus of research on transformation ( patches, pathways, lifeways, etc.) contrasts with the
orientation of other articles. Beck et al. [76] and Franco
Gavonel et al. [74] are illustrative. The STI framework
of Beck et al. [76] positions science and technology in
relation to political power and to governance – with the
relationship between knowledge and power played out
over what counts as a desirable future and for whom, plus
the political choices this entails. This helps ‘capture the
tensions between alternative visions and contingencies in
policy choices, as well as discern the forms of power at
work in articulating futures that ‘ought’ to be attained
. . . [raising] . . . the question whether or not, and to
whom, the particular societal futures imaginable through
techno scientific changes seem worth attaining’ (p.144).
For Franco Gavonel et al. [74], their framing calls for
conceptualizing transformation processes within a migration – sustainability nexus. They suggest that migration
facilitates transformations to sustainability if it simultaneously improves the three dimensions of sustainability:
(a) migration increases aggregate wellbeing while lowering environmental burdens; (b) it reduces inequality in
multiple spatial, economic, and health dimensions; and,
(c) it represents or promotes diversity, political freedom
and reduced insecurity.
Most articles (Table 1) give attention to regional development within trajectories of planned intervention and
the (unintended) consequences. This holds learning for
stimulating deliberative ‘transformations to sustainability’ and for the challenge of working across scales,
including when outcomes cannot be controlled or predicted. Brondizio et al. [69] illustrate this well be examining the emergence of place-based initiatives in the
Brazilian Amazon. The article focuses on actions by local
actors who have ownership (and take the risk) in implementing ideas intended to transform their social and
environmental realities, even if the initiatives are externally initiated and supported. They emphasise the role of
historical processes and development interventions and
ideologies affecting place-based initiatives today, calling
attention to the importance of cross-scale interactions,
www.sciencedirect.com

alongside the complexity involved in understanding
whether the achievement of a goal at one level is resilient
and can contribute to more emergent and desirable outcomes at higher levels.
As indicated in Table 1 (ii), approaches to transformation
suggest articles recognise a need to encompass diverse
actors and interests, alongside consideration of which or
whose visions of transformation or a desirable future are
privileged, plus whether this is just and equitable. In this
respect, the majority of articles stress how identification of
opportunities for transformations to sustainability, and
associated challenges, involves political choices. For
social scientists, this necessitates scrutiny of power and
politics, knowledge and agency. It also highlights the
need to understand the reproduction of inequality. Such
understandings shape the selection of social science theory, a point well elaborated by Scoones et al. [21] in their
overview of bodies of social science and political theory
that inform ‘structural’, ‘systemic’ and ‘enabling’
approaches to transformation.
Emphasis on power and politics brings to the fore epistemological issues, in terms of what forms of knowledge
inform understanding of transformation and sustainability, and whose perspectives gain credibility. Many articles
focus on groups of people who are marginalised from
dominant society and whose knowledge is disregarded by
development planners. This leads Zwaarteveen et al.
[71] to emphasize the value of plural knowledges within
the politics of care ‘allowing many knowers, knowledges
and visions of groundwater to co-exist, learning from and
living with, rather than overcoming, difference.’ Alternatively, for Porto de Albuquerque et al. [77], this means
taking seriously the value of citizen science and attention
to local and indigenous knowledge, while being mindful
of the need to avoid instrumentalising knowledge
processes.
For some articles, attention to knowledge also links to
reflection on researcher positionality and the role of
research in action on transformation. For example, Mehta
et al. [72] focus on the praxis of transformation to
generate ‘informed action which seeks to facilitate
socially just processes through an explicitly normative
positioning of praxis as value-orientated and bottom-up
change’ (p.112). Likewise, and in contrast, Fisher et al.
[73] approach transdisciplinarity through ‘co-labouring’
[80], with emphasis on mutual learning rather than
researchers’ direct involvement in transformative action.
Likewise, Bastiaensen et al. [67] draw attention to how
researchers’ own epistemologies, interests and values
interact with those of other actors to shape the identification and evolution of transformative alternatives.
Researchers and development practitioners may hold
certain perspectives on the importance of social justice
or on the need for systemic change to achieve
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

8 Transformations to sustainability

transformation to sustainability, they thereby have to be
aware that the process of searching for alternatives is
inevitably conditioned by how their own (also diverse)
epistemologies and interests interact with those of other
actors [43,77].

Acknowledgements

Inevitably, challenges and opportunities for transformation arise in the ‘messy business’ of how political choices
are made and transformative societal action unfolds. This
underlines the value of social science for addressing
transformations to sustainability.

Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:

1.

Ripple WJ, Wolf C, Newsome TM, Barnard P, Moomaw WR: World
scientists’ warning of a climate emergency. Bioscience 2020,
70:8-12.

Conclusion

2.

Coninck H, Revi A, Babiker M, Bertoldi P, Buckeridge M,
Cartwright A, Dong W, Ford J, Fuss S, Hourcade J-C et al.:
Chapter 4 - strengthening and implementing the global
response. In Global Warming of 1.5 C. In Global Warming of
1.5 c. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming
of 1.5 C above Pre-industrial Levels and Related Global
Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of
Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate
Change. Edited by Masson Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pörtner H-O,
Roberts D, Skea J, Shukla PR, Pirani A, Moufouma-Okia W, Péan
C, Pidcock R.et al.: 2018:313-443.

3.

IPCC: Climate Change 2014 Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
2014.

4.

IPCC: Global Warming of 1.5 C. An Inter-governmental Panel on
Climate Change Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming
of 1.5 c above Pre-industrial Levels and Related Global
Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of
Strengthening the Global Resp. 2018.

5.

Brondizio ES, Settele J, Dı́az S, Ngo HT: Global Assessment
Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services of the
Intergovernmental Science-policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services. 2019.

6.

United Nations: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. 2015.

It is early days to conclude what contribution articles –
and the research projects on which they are based – will
make to thinking on transformations to sustainability,
although a promising start is captured. Building on earlier
studies [21,53,54,65,81], articles underline how different social science orientations and forms of transdisciplinary collaboration can inform understandings of transformations to sustainability by giving attention to societal
dynamics and locating these dynamics in historical and
comparative perspectives.
Increasingly, and positively, the widening of approaches
and voices on transformation/transition, within and
beyond the social sciences, introduces different worldviews and narratives into the debate [64,82]. This facilitates understanding of how approaches (both methodological and empirical insights) can be generated by social
sciences more precisely, as well as progressively helping
to tease out cultural, social, economic and political obstacles to change [12,21,83].
This all underlines the importance of embracing theoretically rooted, empirically informed, and collaboratively
generated knowledge to address sustainability challenges
within different contexts [21,56]. The value of transdisciplinarity, involving academic and non-academic
actors in co-design and co-production, comes to the fore
to address these complex challenges [84,85]. By necessity, attention to sustainability involves coupling issues of
nature and society, while politicizing and pluralizing
transformation processes and outcomes to help to ensure
transparency and to safeguard against appropriation by
singular perspectives on what constitutes a sustainable
future and how to achieve it [14]. Transformations to
sustainability are necessarily plural and will continue to
unfold in different ways.

Conflict of interest statement
Nothing declared.

Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

We would like to acknowledge the ‘Transformations to Sustainability’
research programme for facilitating this special issue.

References and recommended reading
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest

7.


Braidotti R: “We” may be in this together but we are not all
human and we are not one and the same. Ecocene Cappadocia
J Environ Humanit 2020, 1:26-31
Article reflects on the ‘post-human convergence’ between critiques of
humanism and rejection of anthropocentrism, which Braidotti characterises as an encounter fraught with painful contradictions and challenging problems.

8.


Bennett NJ, Blythe J, Cisneros-Montemayor AM, Singh GG,
Sumaila UR: Just transformations to sustainability.
Sustainability 2019, 11
Article highlights the need to encompass social justice considerations in
relation to sustainability. The authors’ present a framing of just transitions
that includes different equity dimensions.

9.


McPhearson T, Raymond CM, Gulsrud N, Albert C, Coles N,
Fagerholm N, Nagatsu M, Olafsson AS, Soininen N, Vierikko K:
Radical changes are needed for transformations to a good
Anthropocene. npj Urban Sustain 2021, 1
Article presents five key principles requiring fundamental cognitive,
behavioral, and cultural shifts within transformation processes, including
rethinking growth, rethinking efficiency, rethinking the state, rethinking
the commons, and rethinking justice needed together to radically transform neighborhoods, cities, and regions.

10. Newell P, Srivastava S, Naess LO, Torres Contreras GA, Price R:

Toward transformative climate justice: an emerging research
agenda. WIREs Clim Change 2021:1-17 http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/wcc.733
The article reviews climate justice literature and proposes a research
agenda based on a transformative approach to climate justice.
11. Bai X, van der Leeuw S, O’Brien K, Berkhout F, Biermann F,
Brondizio ES, Cudennec C, Dearing J, Duraiappah A, Glaser M
et al.: Plausible and desirable futures in the Anthropocene: a
new research agenda. Glob Environ Change 2016, 39:351362.
www.sciencedirect.com

Critical social science perspectives on transformations to sustainability Fisher, Brondizio and Boyd 9

12. Yearley S: Political, ethical, and societal aspects of issuing
warnings to humanity. Ecocene Cappadocia J Environ Humanit
2020, 1:19-25.

27. Duit A, Galaz V, Eckerberg K, Ebbesson J: Governance,
complexity, and resilience. Glob Environ Change 2010, 20:363368.

13. Heise UK: Introduction: planet, species, justice - and the
stories we tell about them. In Routledge Companion to the
Environmental Humanities. Edited by Heise UK, Christiensen J,
Niemann M. Routledge; 2017:1-10.

28. Ostrom E: A general framework for analysing sustainability of
social-ecological systems. Science (80-) 2009, 325:419-422.

14. Blythe J, Silver J, Evans L, Armitage D, Bennett NJ, Moore M-L,
 Morrison TH, Brown K: The dark side of transformation: latent
risks in contemporary sustainability discourse. Antipode 2018,
50:1206-1223
Article focuses on transformation to consider how the term is translated
from an academic concept into an assemblage of normative policies and
practices, and how this process might shape social, political, and environmental change. The authors’ identify latent risks associated with
discourses that treat deliberative transformation as apolitical or
inevitable.
15. Feola G: Societal transformation in response to global
environmental change: a review of emerging concepts. Ambio
2015, 44:376-390.
16. Geels FW: Socio-technical transitions to sustainability: a
 review of criticisms and elaborations of the multi-level
perspective. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2019, 8:187-201
Article discusses the socio-technical transition literature, particularly the
Multi-Level Perspective, which investigates the fundamental changes in
(energy, transport, housing, agro-food) systems that are needed to
address persistent sustainability problems.
17. Köhler J, Geels FW, Kern F, Markard J, Onsongo E, Wieczorek A,

Alkemade F, Avelino F, Bergek A, Boons F et al.: An agenda for
sustainability transitions research: state of the art and future
directions. Environ Innov Soc Transit 2019, 31:1-32
Article provides an insightful review of sustainability transitions research.
18. Ollivier G, Magda D, Mazé A, Plumecocq G, Lamine C:
Agroecological transitions: what can sustainability transition
frameworks teach us? An ontological and empirical analysis.
Ecol Soc 2018, 23.
19. Patterson J, Schulz K, Vervoort J, Adler C, Hurlbert M, van der
Hel S, Schmidt A, Barau A, Obani P, Sethi M et al.:
“Transformations towards sustainability” Emerging
approaches, critical reflections, and a research agenda. Earth
System Governance Working Paper No. 33. Lund and Amsterdam:
Earth System Governance Project; 2015.
20. Loorbach D, Frantzeskaki N, Avelino F: Sustainability transitions
research: transforming science and practice for societal
change. Annu Rev Environ Resour 2017, 42:599-626.
21. Scoones I, Stirling A, Abrol D, Atela J, Charli-Joseph L, Eakin H,
 Ely A, Olsson P, Pereira L, Priya R et al.: Transformations to
sustainability: combining structural, systemic and enabling
approaches. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2020, 42:65-75
The article outlines different conceptualizations of transformation, and
presents a set of practical principles for effective research and action
toward sustainability. Argues that three considerations are critical for
effective transformations to sustainability: diverse knowledges, plural
pathways and the political nature of transformation.
22. Hölscher K, Wittmayer JM, Loorbach D: Transition versus

transformation: what’s the difference? Environ Innov Soc
Transit 2018, 27:1-3
Article provides a constructive discussion on terminological differences.
23. Holling CS: Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annu
Rev Ecol Syst 1973, 4:1-23.
24. Rockstrom J: A safe operating space for humanity. Nature 2009,
461.
25. Steffen W, Richardson K, Rockström J, Cornell SE, Fetzer I,
Bennett EM, Biggs R, Carpenter SR, De Vries W, De Wit CA et al.:
Planetary boundaries: guiding human development on a
changing planet. Science (80-) 2015, 347.
26. Lenton TM, Rockström J, Gaffney O, Rahmstorf S, Richardson K,
Steffen W, Schellnhuber HJ: Climate tipping points - too risky to
bet against. Nature 2019, 575:592-595.

www.sciencedirect.com

29. Ostrom E: The Evolution of Norms, Rules, and Rights. Paper
prepared for presentation at the workshop on “Property Rights and
the Performance of Natural Resource Systems”. Beijer Institute,
The Royal Swedish Academy of Science; 1993. September 2-4.
30. Ostrom E: Governing the Commons: the Evolution of Institutions
for Collective Action. Cambridge University Press; 1990. 1990.
31. Folke C, Carpenter SR, Walker B, Scheffer M, Chapin T,
Rockstrom J: Resilience thinking: integrating resilience,
adaptability and transformabilit. Ecol Soc 2010, 15.
32. Walker B, Holling CS, Carpenter SR, Kinzig A: Resilience,
adaptability and transformability in social-ecological systems.
Ecol Soc 2004, 9.
33. Olsson P, Galaz V, Boonstra WJ: Sustainability transformations:
a resilience perspective. Ecol Soc 2014, 19.
34. Miller F, Osbahr H, Boyd E, Thomalla F, Bharwani S, Ziervogel G,
Walker B, Birkmann J, Van der Leeuw S, Rockström J et al.:
Resilience and vulnerability: complementary or conflicting
concepts? Ecol Soc 2010, 15.
35. Dornelles AZ, Boyd E, Nunes RJ, Asquith M, Boonstra WJ,
Delabre I, Michael Denney J, Grimm V, Jentsch A, Nicholas KA
et al.: Towards a bridging concept for undesirable resilience in
social-ecological systems. Glob Sustain 2020, 3.
36. Eriksson H, Blythe JL, Österblom H, Olsson P: Beyond social
ecological traps: fostering transformations towards
sustainability. Ecol Soc 2021, 26
Introduces a special feature exploring social-ecological traps and pathways for disrupting these traps.
37. Virtanen PK, Siragusa L, Guttorm H: Editorial overview:
indigenous conceptualizations of ‘sustainability.’. Curr Opin
Environ Sustain 2020, 43:A1-A2.
38. Charli-Joseph L, Siqueiros-Garcia JM, Eakin H, Manuel Navarrete D, Shelton R: Promoting agency for social-ecological
transformation: a transformation-lab in the Xochimilco socialecological system. Ecol Soc 2018, 46:1-5 http://dx.doi.org/
10.5751/ES-10214-230246
An insightful case study demonstrating application of the transformationlab approach.
39. Pathways Network: Transformative Pathways to Sustainability:
 Learning Across Disciplines, Cultures and Contexts. Routledge;
2021
Book presents a set of innovative experiments from around that world
that offer an insight into transformations to sustainability, based on
research exploring sustainability challenges in local or national contexts.
40. Herrfahrdt-Pähle E, Schlüter M, Olsson P, Folke C, Gelcich S,
 Pahl-Wostl C: Sustainability transformations: socio-political
shocks as opportunities for governance transitions. Glob
Environ Change 2020, 63:102097
Article analyses scope for rapid, large-scale socio-political change in
ways that open up possibilities for transformative change of natural
resource governance, unpacking how different dimensions of change
interact. Illustrated with examples of water governance in Chile, South
Africa, and Uzbekistan.
41. Grin J, Rotmans J, Schot J, in collaboration with Geels, F. and
Loorbach D: Transitions to Sustainable Development: New
Directions in the Study of Long Term Transformative Change.
Routledge; 2010.
42. Feola G: Capitalism in sustainability transitions research: time
for a critical turn? Environ Innov Soc Transit 2020, 35:241-250.
43. Sovacool BK, Hook A, Martiskainen M, Brock A, Turnheim B: The
decarbonisation divide: contextualizing landscapes of lowcarbon exploitation and toxicity in Africa. Glob Environ Change
2020, 68:1-19.
44. Sovacool BK: When subterranean slavery supports
sustainability transitions? Power, patriarchy, and child labor in
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

10 Transformations to sustainability

artisanal Congolese cobalt mining. Extr Ind Soc 2021, 8:271293.
45. Swilling M: The Age of Sustainability: Just Transitions in a Complex
 World. Routledge; 2020
Book explores how to make sense of global environmental crisis and the
dynamics of transition exploring whether and how it is possible to move
towards a more sustainable and equitable epoch.
46. Elmqvist T, Siri J, Andersson E, Anderson P, Bai X, Das PK,
Gatere T, Gonzalez A, Goodness J, Handel SN et al.: Urban
tinkering. Sustain Sci 2018, 13:1549-1564.
47. Elmqvist T, Andersson E, Frantzeskaki N, McPhearson T,
 Olsson P, Gaffney O, Takeuchi K, Folke C: Sustainability and
resilience for transformation in the urban century. Nat Sustain
2019, 2:267-273
Proposes a framework for addressing urban transformation.
48. Patterson J, Schulz K, Vervoort J, van der Hel S, Widerberg O,
Adler C, Hurlbert M, Anderton K, Sethi M, Barau A: Exploring the
governance and politics of transformations towards
sustainability. Environ Innov Soc Transit 2017, 24:1-16.
49. Scoones I, Leach M, Newell P (Eds): The Politics of Green
Transformations. Routledge; 2015.
50. Scoones I: The politics of sustainability and development. Annu
Rev Environ Resour 2016, 41:293-319.
51. Leach M, Scoones I, Stirling A: Dynamic Sustainabilities:
Technology, Environment, Social Justice. Earthscan; 2010.
52. Pereira, Laura M, Karpouzoglou T, Frantzeskaki N, Olsson P:
Designing transformative spaces for sustainability in socialecological systems. Ecol Soc 2018, 23:32.
53. Ely A, Marin A, Charli-Joseph L, Abrol Dinesh, Apgar M, Atela J,
Ayre B, Byrne R, Choudhary BK, Chengo V et al.: Structured
collaboration across a transformative knowledge networklearning across disciplines, cultures and contexts?
Sustainability 2020, 12.
54. Charli-Joseph L, Siqueiros-Garcia JM, Eakin H, ManuelNavarrete D, Shelton R: Promoting agency for social-ecological
transformation: a transformation-lab in the Xochimilco socialecological system. Ecol Soc 2018, 23.
55. OECD: World Social Science Report 2013: Changing Global
Environments Between Social and Planetary Boundaries:
Navigating Pathways in the Safe and Just Space for Humanity.
2013.
56. Leach M, MacGregor H, Scoones I, Wilkinson A: Post-pandemic
 transformations: how and why COVID-19 requires us to
rethink development. World Dev 2021, 138:105233
Article explores the implications of the COVID-19 for development studies, arguing that post-COVID-19 development must have a radically
transformative, egalitarian and inclusive knowledge and politics at its
core.
57. Pelling M, O’Brien K, Matyas D: Adaptation and transformation.
Clim Change 2015, 133:113-117.
58. Pelling M: Adaptation to Climate Change: From Resilience to
Transformation. Routledge; 2010.
59. O’Brien K: Is the 1.5 C target possible? Exploring the three

spheres of transformation. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2018,
31:153-160
Article conceptualises three interacting spheres of transformation: the
practical, political, and personal, exploring how they can be used to
identify leverage points for transformations.
60. O’Brien K: Global environmental change II: from adaptation to
deliberate transformation. Prog Hum Geogr 2012, 36:667-676
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0309132511425767.
61. Eriksen SH, Nightingale AJ, Eakin H: Reframing adaptation: the
political nature of climate change adaptation. Glob Environ
Change 2015, 35:523-533.
62. Eriksen S, Schipper ELF, Scoville-Simonds M, Vincent K,
 Adam HN, Brooks N, Harding B, Khatri D, Lenaerts L, Liverman D
et al.: Adaptation interventions and their effect on vulnerability
in developing countries: help, hindrance or irrelevance? World
Dev 2021, 141:105383
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

Article reviews the outcomes of internationally funded interventions
aimed at climate change adaptation and vulnerability reduction. It highlights how some interventions inadvertently rein-force, redistribute or
create new sources of vulnerability. Warns that unless the politics of
framing and of scale are explicitly tackled, transformational interventions
risk having even more adverse effects on marginalised populations than
current adaptation.
63. Blaser M, De la Cadena M: Pluriverse: proposals for a world of
many worlds. In A World of Many Worlds. Edited by De la Cadena
M, Blaser M. Duke University Press; 2018:1-22.
64. Escobar A: Pluriversal Politics: The Real and the Possible. Duke
University Press; 2020

Book explores the potential for radically alternative visions of the future to
emerge to address the need for profound societal transformation in the
face of planetary crisis.
65. Temper L, Walter M, Rodriguez I, Kothari A, Turhan E: A
perspective on radical transformations to sustainability:
resistances, movements and alternatives. Sustain Sci 2018,
13:747-764.
66. Ashish K, Salleh A, Escobar A, Demoria F, Acosta A: Pluriverse: A
Postdevelopment Dictionary. Tulika Books; 2019.
67. Bastiaensen J, Huybrechs F, Merlet P, Romero M, Van Hecken G:
 Fostering bottom-up actor coalitions for transforming
complex rural territorial pathways. Curr Opin Environ Sustain
2021, 49:42-49
Presents a perspective on rural transformations to sustainability based on
the TRUEPATH action-research project based on a territorial pathway
framework. Focused on Nicaragua.
68. van Leeuwen M, Ansoms A, Mushagalusa Mudinga E, Nyenyezi
 Bisoka A, Niyonkuru RC, Shaw J, van der Haar G: Promoting land
tenure security for sustainable peace — lessons on the politics
of transformation. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021, 49:57-65
Examines on land registration in conflict-affected settings to explore the
politics of transformation, with a focus on Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
69. Brondizio ES, Andersson K, de Castro F, Futemma C, Salk C,
 Tengö M, Londres M, Tourne DC, Gonzalez TS, Molina-Garzón A
et al.: Making place-based sustainability initiatives visible in
the Brazilian Amazon. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021, 49:66-78
Reviews the history of development interventions influencing the emergence of ‘place-based initiatives’ and potential to promote change in
production, governance, and market-access in order to improve living
standards and environmental sustainability.
70. Massarella K, Nygren A, Fletcher R, Büscher B, Kiwango WA,
 Komi S, Krauss JE, Mabele MB, McInturff A, Sandroni LT et al.:
Transformation beyond conservation: how critical social
science can contribute to a radical new agenda in biodiversity
conservation. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021, 49:79-87
Focuses on conservation to outline the role of social scientific enquiry in
facilitating the framing of debates on transformative change in conservation with respect to the politicisation and pluralisation of knowledge and
action, helping to facilitate the identification of transformative
alternatives.
71. Zwarteveen M, Kuper M, Olmos-Herrera C, Dajani M, Kemerink Seyoum J, Frances C, Beckett L, Lu F, Kulkarni S, Kulkarni H et al.:
Transformations to groundwater sustainability: from
individuals and pumps to communities and aquifers. Curr Opin
Environ Sustain 2021, 49:88-97
Takes an anti-colonial and feminist approach to normatively assess and
learn from the knowledge, technologies and institutions that characterize
groundwater initiatives. In so doing seeks to ground possibilities for
transformations to sustainability within collective action.
72. Mehta L, Srivastava S, Movik S, Adam HN, D’Souza R,
 Parthasarathy D, Naess LO, Ohte N: Transformation as praxis:
responding to climate change uncertainties in marginal
environments in South Asia. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021,
49:110-117
Proposes the notion of transformation as praxis, exploring how agency
can be recovered by marginalized people as a basis for assembling and
effecting systemic transformative change at grassroots level by hybrid
and transformative alliances.
73. Fisher E, Luning S, D’Angelo L, Araujo CH, Arnaldi de Balme L,
 Calvimontes J, van de Camp E, da Costa Ferreira L, Lanzano C,
Massaro L et al.: Transforming matters: sustaining gold
www.sciencedirect.com

Critical social science perspectives on transformations to sustainability Fisher, Brondizio and Boyd 11

lifeways in artisanal and small-scale mining. Curr Opin Environ
Sustain 2021, 49:190-200
Uses the notion of gold lifeways to capture how the matter of mining
shapes different worlds of extraction, with the potential for transformations to sustainability grounded within realities that give rise to plural
mining futures.
74. Franco Gavonel M, Adger WN, Safra de Campos R, Boyd E,
 Carr ER, Fábos A, Fransen S, Jolivet D, Zickgraf C, Codjoe SN
et al.: The migration-sustainability paradox: transformations in
mobile worlds. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021, 49:98-109
Presents a framework for addressing migration-sustainability linkages
based on environmental, social, and economic dimensions of sustainability, highlighting dimensions of migration related to identity and social
transformation.
75. Eppinger E, Jain A, Vimalnath P, Gurtoo A, Tietze F, Hernandez
 Chea R: Sustainability transitions in manufacturing: the role of
intellectual property. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021, 49:118-126
Focuses on the potential intellectual property rights (IPR) can play in
unlocking sustainable innovation, supporting organisations to move
towards sustainability within wider processes of transition.
76. Beck S, Jasanoff S, Stirling A, Polzin C: The governance of
 sociotechnical transformations to sustainability. Curr Opin
Environ Sustain 2021, 49:143-152
Presents a sociotechnical imaginaries (STI) framework that expose
neglected governance issues and facilitate a focus on sociotechnical
areas of relevance to sustainability transformations, helping to illustrate
their multi-dimensionality and temporality.
77. Porto de Albuquerque J, Anderson L, Calvillo N, Coaffee J,
 Cunha MA, Degrossi LC, Dolif G, Horita F, Klonner C, Lima-Silva F
et al.: The role of data in transformations to sustainability: a

www.sciencedirect.com

critical research agenda. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2021,
49:153-163
Investigates the role of digital technologies and data innovations, such as
big data and citizen-generated data, to enable transformations to
sustainability.
78. Fisher E, Bavinck M, Amsalu A: Transforming asymmetrical
conflicts over natural resources in the Global South. Ecol Soc
2018, 23.
79. Merton RK: On Theoretical Sociology - Five Essays, Old and New.
New York: The Free Press; 1967. [1949].
80. de la Cadena M: Earth Beings: Ecologies of Practice across
Andean Worlds. Duke University Press; 2015.
81. Temper L, Del Bene D: Transforming knowledge creation for
environmental and epistemic justice. Curr Opin Environ Sustain
2016, 20:41-49 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2016.05.004.
82. Hartman S, Oppermann S: Seeds of transformative change.
Ecocene Cappadocia J Environ Humanit 2020, 1:1-18.
83. Lahsen M, Turnhout E: How norms, needs, and power in science
obstruct transformations towards sustainability. Environ Res
Lett 2021, 16.
84. Moser SC: Can science on transformation transform science?
Lessons from co-design. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 2016,
20:106-115.
85. Norström AV, Cvitanovic C, Löf MF, West S, Wyborn C,
Balvanera P, Bednarek AT, Bennett EM, Biggs R, de Bremond A
et al.: Principles for knowledge co-production in sustainability
research. Nat Sustain 2020, 3:182-190.

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2022, 55:101160

