Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Transformations to sustainability: combining structural,
systemic and enabling approaches
Ian Scoones1, Andrew Stirling2, Dinesh Abrol3, Joanes Atela4,
Lakshmi Charli-Joseph5, Hallie Eakin6, Adrian Ely2, Per Olsson7,
Laura Pereira8, Ritu Priya3, Patrick van Zwanenberg9 and
Lichao Yang10
The imperatives of environmental sustainability, poverty
alleviation and social justice (partially codified in the Sustainable
Development Goals or SDGs) call for ambitious societal
transformations. As such, few aspects of actionable knowledge
for sustainability are more crucial than those concerning the
processes of transformation. This article offers a brief overview of
different conceptualisations of transformation, and outlines a set
of practical principles for effective research and action towards
sustainability. We review three approaches to transformations,
labelled: ‘structural’, ‘systemic’ and ‘enabling’. We show how
different ways of understanding what we mean by
transformations can affect what actions follow. But these
approaches are not mutually exclusive. We use an international
set of examples on low carbon economy transformations, seed
systems, wetland conservation and peri-urban development to
show how they can be complementary and reinforcing. We
describe three cross-cutting practical considerations that must
be taken seriously for effective transformations to sustainability:
diverse knowledges, plural pathways and the essentially political
nature of transformation. Realizing the ambitions of the SDGs, we
conclude, requires being clear about what we mean by
transformation, and recognizing these basic methodological
principles for action.

Addresses
1
STEPS Centre, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9RE, UK
2
STEPS Centre, Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9SL, UK
3
Transdisciplinary Research Cluster on Sustainability Studies, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi 110067, India
4
African Centre for Technology Studies, ICIPE Duduville Campus,
Kasaran, P.O. Box 45917 – 00100, Nairobi, Kenya
5
Laboratorio Nacional de Ciencias de la Sostenibilidad [LANCIS],
Instituto de Ecologı́a [IE], Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
[UNAM], Mexico City, 04500, Mexico
6
School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, PO Box 875502,
Tempe, AZ 85287-5502, USA
7
Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, Kräftriket 2B,
SE-10691, Sweden
8
Centre for Complex Systems in Transition, University of Stellenbosch,
19 Jonkershoek Rd, Stellenbosch, South Africa
9
Centro de Investigaciones para la Transformación [CENIT], Universidad
Nacional de San Martı́n [UNSAM], Av. Pres. Roque Sáenz Peña 832,
CP1035, Ciudad Autonóma de Buenos Aires, Argentina
10
School of Social Development and Public Policy, Beijing Normal
University, 19 Xinjiekou Wai Street, Haidian District, Beijing 100875, China
Corresponding author: Stirling, Andrew (a.c.stirling@sussex.ac.uk)
www.sciencedirect.com

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75
This review comes from a themed issue on The state of knowledge
on social transformations to sustainability
Edited by Susi Moser, Sarah Moore and Lizzie Sayer
For a complete overview see the Issue and the Editorial
Available online 22nd January 2020
Received: 15 November 2019; Accepted: 12 December 2019
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2019.12.004
1877-3435/ã 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Introduction: what is transformation?
Through the Sustainable Development Goals, or
SDGs, the international community adopted an ambitious agenda to address the interlinked challenges of
environmental sustainability (previously defined, for
example, with reference to the ‘planetary boundaries’
[1,2]), eliminating poverty alongside fulfilling other
social and economic needs [3], and promoting equity
[4]. In response, a wide literature reflects a large
movement calling for transformations to sustainability.
While a ubiquitous term, it is often not clear what
should be transformed, by and for whom, and through
what processes. As Feola argues, “high conceptual
elasticity and lack of empirical grounding of the concept of transformation generate the risk of voiding the
term of meaning” [5]. Others point to the risks inherent
to the ‘diminution or mainstreaming’ [6], or the
‘contortion or manipulation’ of notions of transformation [7] in ways which act against genuine, radical
change. In response, as argued elsewhere ([8] chapter
1), including in this journal [9], we see a crucial need to
consider reflexively how knowledge about transformation can inform efforts towards intentional change in
line with social-environmental challenges and the
SDGs. In order to do this, we first probe what is meant
by ‘transformation’.
According to Patterson, the term generally implies
“fundamental changes in structural, functional, relational,
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

66 The state of knowledge on social transformations to sustainability

and cognitive aspects of socio-technical-ecological
systems that lead to new patterns of interactions and
outcomes” ([10], drawing on [11,12,5]). Other work on
transformation emphasizes how system boundaries are
defined, what functions and structure are recognized as
determining of system states, and what dynamics are
considered essential for a system’s persistence [13,14].
The processes that generate transformations are also
subject of debate [15]. For some, transformation arises
endogenously from incremental, carefully planned interventions made by (often policy) actors [16], whilst
for others, transformation is an emergent property of
large-scale political-economic forces and social mobilization [17]. In other cases, transformation is not humangenerated, but triggered by exogenous biophysical
forces such as climate change, which, while they may
be anthropogenic in nature, are outside the control of any
actor or group [18].
Among those perspectives focusing specifically on the
possible roles of social agency in the driving of transformation, three broadly distinguishable emphases emerge.
Reflecting a critical stance concerning the current
economic interests and practices producing unsustainable
outcomes, some authors point to a need for fundamental
structural changes to production and consumption [19–21].
Others advocate acceleration of more incremental
approaches for managing social, technological and ecological
transitions, driven by combinations of technological
innovations and progressive policy [22,23]. Still others argue
that change must emerge from below through networks of
civic movements and grassroots activity that together, in
often unruly ways, construct wider change [17]. How do we
make sense of these different ways of understanding and
enacting transformation?
This paper focuses particularly on human drivers of
transformations — but recognises after Patterson (above)
that these can be viewed equally as structural, functional,
relational, or cognitive in nature. We argue that to achieve
the humanitarian, ecological and technological visions
encapsulated in the SDGs, transformation will be
required at multiple scales and organizational levels,
and with deliberate normative steering.
We suggest that contemporary debates about transformations to sustainability should draw on deep, contrasting
political traditions, which reflect distinct but overlapping
understandings of social processes that generate transformative change [8,24]. In the following sections we do
this, drawing on these literatures to propose three distinct
but complementary approaches to understanding and
advancing transformations: 1) ‘structural approaches’,
referring to fundamental changes in the way production
and consumption is governed, organized and practiced by
societies; 2) ‘systemic approaches’, referring to intentional
change targeted at the interdependencies of specific
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

institutions, technologies and constellations of actors in
order to steer complex systems towards normative goals;
and 3) ‘enabling approaches’ focused on fostering the
human agency, values and capacities necessary to manage
uncertainty, act collectively, identify and enact pathways to
desired futures.
Structural approaches

Structural approaches focus on changes in perceived underlying foundations of politics, economy and society, and the
need for a complete overhaul of the ideological underpinnings of social systems writ large. Exponents include
classical political economists like Marx, who argued that
revolutionary change was possible at historical moments
when relations of labour and capital do not match existing
capabilities, techniques and technologies [25]. Drawing
on Marx, Lenin focused on the class tensions wrought
by processes of social differentiation in society [26], while
Gramsci envisaged changes overturning generally
accepted social values and understandings resulting in
revolutionary transformation [27,28].
These kinds of structural analyses highlight how key
moments, or conjunctures, are important in generating
transformations, as the relationships between economies
and societies shift, generating crises and tensions
(as illustrated by Polanyi’s seminal analysis [14]), or
alternatively pointing towards new inspirations and
movements for change [29]. Such movements emerging
across civil society — for example, focusing on alternative
economic models including zero growth [30,31] or degrowth [32,33], race, class or gender rights [34,35] — may
also, some argue, come together to create a new politics
for transformative structural change [36,37].
Structural approaches offer powerful historical analyses of
transformations relating to markets, commodity forms or
class relations occurring through radical, sometimes
revolutionary, shifts in power and control at key moments.
Yet many of these studies are rather generic and sweeping.
Some emphasize material forces and downplay human
agency and will, while others imply mechanical causal
processes. Many of them are limited in their appreciation
of environmental thresholds as they often focus on past
transformations, rather than future-oriented efforts.
The importance of localized activity, cultural practices or
incremental policy action is frequently side-lined by a
focus on deeper structural dynamics, driven by historical
processes and shifting interests [38].
Systemic approaches

Systemic approaches, by contrast, follow the resurgence
of growth in systems thinking in the 1980s [39,40] to
identify particular features of systems (such as system
elements, drivers, levels) as targets for focused change,
typically modulated by policy, while recognizing the
significant uncertainty, propensity for non-linear response
www.sciencedirect.com

Transformations to Sustainability: structural, systemic and enabling approaches Scoones et al. 67

and inherent complexity of system interactions. On the
one hand, perspectives from social-ecological systems
thinking (developed from ecology [41]), highlight
the interplay of innovation, learning, and adaptability
in creating system properties such as resilience [42],
acknowledging the potential for dynamic change across
scales [43]. Over the past few decades, social-ecological
systems approaches have taken many forms, and have
increasingly paid attention to power, politics, institutions,
social dimensions and local contexts [44,45]. Many
sophisticated case studies have followed, with major
implications for understanding system sustainability
and transformative change [46]. These follow broadly
similar patterns, in which multiple biophysical and
social features are defined for a notionally bounded
social-ecological system, with strategic interventions
then designed to improve system resilience: the ability
to return to a new state following various kinds of
perturbation [47].
On the other hand, socio-technical systems approaches
focus on different system components such as technology,
infrastructure, financial rules, industry and distribution
networks markets and user practices, regulations and
policies [48]. Traditionally, these emphasise more
controlled ‘transitions’, involving interlinked processes
at levels of the ‘niche’ (localised settings where novelties
emerge), the ‘regime’ (the rules and institutions ordering
wider practice) and ‘the landscape’ (the deeper patterns
shaping social and technological change) [49]. In this
perspective ‘niche’ innovations are able to reform wider
‘regimes’ and so generate socio-technical transitions [50].
Knowledge about system properties is seen to offer
chances for transitions to be managed in ways directed
by policy [51]. Examples include transformations of
transport systems, renewable energy innovations and
agricultural practices. Over time, this approach has been
extended to focus more on the social and political
dimensions of change [52,53], as well as tackling how
change is resisted. Explorations of ‘niches’ as sites for
innovation have also been extended beyond technology
to social and cultural innovations, variously addressing the
roles of socio-political diversity [54] and traditional
ecological knowledge [31], and how these combine in
movements [55,52,56]. But a focus on particular system
categories — like ‘actors’ and ‘levels’ — is retained, as is a
commitment to policy change through incentives,
investments and policy initiatives, usually led by the
state, but often in alliance with others, across the private
sector and civic groups [57,58].
Regardless of the degree of control over change processes
and system outcomes, these system-focused approaches
emphasize the need for knowledge on system dynamics:
the interdependency of social, ecological, institutional
and technological elements that together mark thresholds
in system states. In focusing on the system as a whole,
www.sciencedirect.com

system approaches have tended to diminish the role of
individual agency, downplay the complexity of politics,
power and asymmetries in human-environment dynamics
[59,44]. Originating in the experience of socialtechnological change in the Global North or through
the analysis of relatively bounded systems of natural
resource management, these approaches have often
implicitly presumed the embrace of Western ideals of
deliberative democracy, pre-existing capacities for
collective action, and general support for change that will
result in enhanced equity, environmental integrity and
improved public welfare [61]. Needless to say, it is not
clear how well these assumptions hold even in places of
established democratic institutions, and they may not
hold true in many other parts of the world where progress
in the SDGs is desperately needed [62,63].

Enabling approaches

Enabling approaches draw on both these traditions to
highlight the agency and uncertainties inherent in choosing aims and directions for transformative change [64].
Enabling approaches focus less on specific desired configurations of the system state than structural approaches,
and less on the management of system dynamics than
system approaches. Instead, these approaches emphasize
creating the social attributes — capacities — that
empower individuals and communities to take action
on their own behalf. By ‘agency’, we refer to the deliberate exercise of individual or collective will [65,66], with
enabling approaches focusing especially on the most
excluded interests. For example, many forms of low
carbon transitions have been proposed, each presupposing different values, interests and actions. How can a
policy-maker decide, in merely technical ways, which
policy is most appropriate? What groups and individuals
are able to mobilize the capacities to participate, make
their interests heard and organize to implement change?
How can conditions be created that support the formation
of alliances and social networks through which the
burden and benefits of transformational processes can
be negotiated? Resilience raises similar queries, with
system change following shocks and stress affecting
different people in different ways, and marginalized
groups typically the most vulnerable [13].
Enabling approaches take a more optimistic and directly
activist stance than some structural or systems approaches,
focusing on processes and capacities rather than just outcomes [67]. Beyond major, historically-driven structural
reconfigurations or system changes, opportunities for
transformation are seen in terms of individually smaller
actions that collectively, over time, shift system states in
ways which may be unexpected but which reflect the values
and visions of mobilized agents [17]. Placing less emphasis
on grand theoretical frameworks or pre-decided categories
of phenomena, enabling approaches focus on the values,
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

68 The state of knowledge on social transformations to sustainability

agency, relations and processes that underlie both structures and systems [68].
Multiple forms of power are exercised, with power
emerging both in structural forces and in collective action
[69]. Focusing on the scope for political mobilization and
cultural change, an enabling approach takes a hopeful,
caring, emancipatory stance on transformation; one that
de-emphasizes controlling, violent or fearful futures [70].
Enabling change will inevitably take different forms
in different settings, and requires a wider, unruly and
often adversarial politics of citizen mobilization at its
heart [71–74]; in ways that it might be hoped are more
protected from manipulation or management by
privileged interests.
A number of perspectives are central to an enabling
approach [75,76,77]. Network understandings may
help address more messy power dynamics than are
envisaged in structural or systemic approaches, linking
emerging new actors, structures and processes that
challenge incumbent positions and cultivate new
pathways to sustainability [62,63,78]. A focus on
practice and agency affords more scope for action by
citizens, enabling more emancipatory change, whatever
the direction [79]. The politics of knowledge is also
stressed, including how future transformations are imagined [75,80]. Enabling approaches may be critiqued for
a bias towards privileging local perspectives in an
inherently globalized world [81,82], or a lack of sufficient
attention to how ‘enabled’ communities can induce
needed structural changes to escape traps of poverty
or oppression [83,84].

Complementary lenses

Structural, systemic and enabling approaches are not
mutually exclusive: they offer complementary analytical
lenses on transformative change, as well as complementary approaches to understanding and trying to bring
about real-world change (Table 1). There is no necessary
sequence or logic to conditions that favour structural,
systemic or enabling transformation. While in some cases,
change can be triggered by larger-scale ideological shifts
and movements of capital, leading in turn to enhanced
opportunity and agency for previously marginalized
actors, in other cases, change may be more dispersed
and grassroots in nature, cascading up from local innovations that disrupt system dynamics to create structural
change. Nevertheless, we would argue that for
socially just and equitable transformations (in line with
the ambitions of the SDGs) to occur, necessary structural
and systemic changes will demand enabling and emancipatory change as well. Two illustrations show how
transformations may emerge in different ways.
First, there are transformations to low carbon energy systems
that are essential for tackling climate change. These
are recognized across many governments, businesses and
civil society organizations across the world. With such
transformations central to a number of SDGs, most recognize that climate change requires deep structural shifts
away from fossil fuels [85]. A structural approach argues for
the reconfiguring of global markets and infrastructures,
radically shifting forms of production and consumption
[86]. Requiring support for alternatives, this fundamentally
challenges incumbent interests and implies asymmetrical
costs for transitioning populations. Across Europe,

Table 1
Complementary lenses
Approach

Definition/emphasis

Structural

Fundamental changes in the way Highlights the prevalent
production and consumption is economic and political
governed, organized and
processes and associated
practiced by societies
interests that serve to
perpetuate current conditions

Systemic

Enabling

Pros

Cons

Example

Lack of emphasis on
Emergent discourses on
environmental triggers and
decarbonization or zero- or
processes, individual agency
degrowth economic
and the possibilities of
structures
Mass social mobilization
incremental change; historical
studies may downplay the role of around climate change and
complexity and serendipity
economic inequity
Intentional change targeted at Highlights interdependencies,
Low carbon energy
Critiqued for de-emphasis of
the interdependencies of
connectivity across scale and
individual agency, power and
transitions, focusing on
specific institutions,
geography, and the potential for politics and/or overly managerial technology-centred
developments, modulated
technologies and constellations non-linear shifts in system
approach, glossing over
of actors in order to steer
dynamics across scales.
differences in capacities,
by incentives and
complex systems towards
Emphasizes the role of
governance structure and
disincentives enacted in
normative goals
ecological dynamics in social
politics
policy mixes
change and vice versa.
Fostering the human agency,
Recognizes potential of human May neglect significant
Community led
values and capacities necessary agents for collective action;
structural, political obstacles to environmental action;
to manage uncertainty, act
explicitly addresses
social transformation; burdens hacker/maker spaces for
collectively, identify and enact asymmetries in power and
those with greatest vulnerability grassroots innovation;
pathways to desired futures
circumstances of social injustice with task of transformation
commoning approaches to
sustainable local economies

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

www.sciencedirect.com

Transformations to Sustainability: structural, systemic and enabling approaches Scoones et al. 69

structural transformations have emerged through radical
shifts in economic conditions, such as dramatic reductions
in costs of renewable energy, shifting options in the energy
sector. Change may also result from new political and
institutional commitments — with structural shifts away
from conventional energy infrastructures, as currently
pursued in Germany [87].
A socio-technical systems approach, by contrast,
examines how an incumbent fossil fuel ‘regime’ can be
transformed through substitution by new low carbon
innovations emerging in ‘niches’ (like wind and solar
power), and how these can be nurtured and protected
[88]. This approach, now evident in many European
countries, advocates incremental responses to adapt to
changes in an existing energy regime, including shifts
in production patterns, consumption behaviour and
motivating expectations that allow new, more resilient
systems to develop [89]. Recent work in Kenya has
investigated the potential for systemic change associated
with the pay-as-you go solar photovoltaic niche and
examined its transformative potential in terms of inter
alia the national context for innovation and technology
uptake [90].
An enabling approach to low carbon transformation, by
contrast, focuses on supporting novel pathways for more
emergent social, political and cultural changes, often involving the mobilization of grassroots movements and alliances
driven by a new ethics of sustainability [91]. Examples can
be found in many contributions made by civil society in
areas like community-owned wind power, socially-useful
production or ecological agricultural practices [92]. Here,
directions of transformation are deliberated upon more
politically, articulating diverse definitions of sustainability
and wider social priorities [93,94].
More control-oriented approaches, aiming at structural and
systemic changes, may not engage in this broad politics of
deliberation [70]. ‘Eco-modernist’ visions, for example,
highlight rapid technological ‘solutions’ for climate change,
including focusing on nuclear or geo-engineering technologies [95,96]. But this technical, control-focus can
neglect wider implications around uncertainty, justice or
cultural fit. By contrast, an enabling approach highlights
complementarities between social and environmental
aims, with an openness to contestation, dissent and
deliberation. This helps to shape actively sustainability
transformations that advance social justice as well as
ecological integrity.
A second example highlights the importance of open
source approaches to sustainable food and farming
systems. Transformations in food and farming systems
away from input-intensive polluting industrial farming
towards more diverse sustainable systems are immensely
challenging. This is especially so in settings like
www.sciencedirect.com

Argentina where monolithic systems of intensive
commodity crop and animal production are expanding
rapidly, destroying existing agricultural system diversity.
A pre-condition for agricultural transformation is to
protect what remains of agricultural diversity and expand
it further, to retain a range of alternative working
practices that experiment with less input-intensive
and more socially inclusive and productive agricultural
systems. Here enabling approaches, such as shifts
towards open source legal rules for seed innovation, or
co-operative business models and fair-trade certifications, provide ways to preserve and foster agricultural
diversity. This is because they help open up space for
emergent opportunities, enabling new actors to engage
and novel practices to develop.
For example, institutional innovations like open source seed
licenses can help to reconfigure the wider political economic
structures of food and farming that drive unsustainability.
Such licenses are more accessible to economically marginal
interests and avoid the exclusions of patent-based rules for
governing seed innovation [97]. In Argentina, such new
institutional arrangements have helped form bridges
between those concerned with adverse effects of strict
intellectual property regimes on domestic industries and
technological capabilities and those committed to changing
seed systems in favour of more marginalized producers [98].
In turn, through involving new people, ideas and practices,
such change builds awareness of the constraints and
opportunities imposed by wider political-economic
structures, and enables a novel politics of transformation
around seed production and associated farming systems.
Structural, systemic and enabling approaches are thus
complementary. Instrumental systemic change in policies
and institutions can be enabling of social movements and
novel alliances seeking to address sustainability challenges
in diverse ways, and at the same time, to lay the ground for a
reconfiguration of broader structures.

Principles for pursuing complementarities in
transformative change
These examples highlight how efforts to advance transformations to sustainability may draw on complementary
approaches. Nevertheless, achieving such complementarity implies open, plural and democratic politics, with
central roles not just for policy, but also for mobilization,
critique and political challenge [92]. Such aspirational
conditions are clearly not equally available across the
globe, and, given the diversity of contexts in which
transformation is urgently needed, processes of change
are likely to be contested, in some cases, violently. How,
then, can the science and policy communities vested in
the realization of the SDGs respond practically and
ethically? What specific approaches can help facilitate
transformative change? What principles can best help
realize the complementarities? We suggest three.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

70 The state of knowledge on social transformations to sustainability

The first is ‘taking diverse knowledges seriously’. Different
perspectives compete in processes of transformation,
rooted in different worldviews, positions and knowledges.
It is crucial for scientists and practitioners to appreciate
this diversity — and not homogenize it into a singular
view of progress driven by circumscribed, expert sustainability science [99]. This is not just about respecting
‘indigenous’ or ‘lay’ knowledges, but exploring how new
hybrid knowledge systems — combining diverse sources
of knowledge — can emerge through productive
interactions in which research priorities, problem
definitions and options are negotiated [100,101].
This is the essence of transdisciplinarity, where multiple
forms of expertise co-construct new knowledges that are
both broader in what they consider and more open in their
implications for change [102]. Such processes of co-construction are intensely political, as new ways of thinking
about problems and solutions are created, together with
new ways of tackling problems and acting on the world
[103]. This is more than ‘getting people around a table’
and engineering consensus in managerial forms of
participation. Required instead are more equal processes
of collaboration and exchange, exploring diverse visions
from different standpoints [104]. The process through
which such collaboration and exchange is realized will
necessarily differ, and needs to be acutely sensitive to the
political opportunities and costs, social-cultural context
and the current state of a particular system [105]. For
scientists and practitioners, enabling approaches often
require a transformation in roles, embracing positions
that emphasize facilitation, ‘brokering’, convening and
steering rather than solely knowledge production or
policy implementation [106].
For example, ‘transformation labs’ have been used in a
number of recent initiatives as spaces for dialogue around
transformation [67,97,107,108]. These processes help
mobilize people and action around a problem, giving
opportunities for learning and reflexivity in exploring divergent values and interests [109,110]. What constitutes the
structure and process for a transformation lab in the United
Kingdom, however, will be quite different to what such
a process looks like in China [106,111], given existing
political circumstances and governance structures that
place different costs on the recognition of plural
knowledges. In addressing the sustainability challenges
of the Xochimilco wetland in Mexico City, for instance,
a culture of exchange was created that enabled participants
to re-frame basic challenges. Through participatory
activities, the transformation lab embraced an enabling
approach, building space for participants to step back from
the contentious land use and water quality issues that
divided the community, to focus on the values and
meanings they collectively wanted to conserve [107].
Rather than an exhausting task of fighting forces that the
participants felt were beyond participants’ control, the
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

problem was recast as one of maintaining the identity
and meanings they attached to the ‘Xochimilco wetland’.
By focusing on capacities and agency, both of individual
people and different social groups, the process illuminated
where power is held and how it can be mobilized to achieve
more just and sustainable development pathways [112].
Beyond appreciation of diverse knowledges, there is a need to
‘take plural pathways seriously’. Different ideas and values of
sustainability imply multiple — very material — institutional
and infrastructural transformations. No matter how specific
the context, there is never only one relevant, viable path. The
many indicators and targets of the SDGs usefully delimit a
target space — but how to realize the plurality of ways to get
there? This will require demanding new forms of deliberation
amongst contending actors. Especially crucial is engagement
not just with diverse ideas, but also with the contrasting norms,
interests and practices of different actors. In areas like
agricultural strategies, energy policy or public health,
approaches like multi-criteria mapping and participatory
scenario workshops can help collaborative efforts to navigate
the implications of different pathways and the contrasting
ways to develop any one [113].
For example, progress in addressing the sustainability
challenges of the Xochimilco wetland has been stymied
by disagreement over the best strategies to pursue. Those
who consider themselves native to the communities that
have practised agriculture within this wetland argue
that the persistent degradation and urbanization of this
environment, the decline of traditional farming techniques, and the commodification of the ecosystem suit the
interests of the urban elite. They are suspicious of formal
development plans and interventions by the city,
and advocate local sovereignty and control in the
face of external power: in other words, a structural transformation. Alternatively, some focus on technological
interventions, arguing that transformation is needed in
the ways people live within the system, rather than with
the system itself. Thus, they demand institutional and
policy support for eco-friendly sanitation technologies
and rainwater harvesting, as mechanisms through
which the human relationship to the ecosystem can be
fundamentally changed. The transformation lab created a
space to confront and discuss assumptions about which
pathway — of many possibilities — will be most
successful for whom, and why.
Our third principle, ‘taking politics seriously’, builds directly
on the previous two. It reminds us that — however well
assisted by technical expertise — engaging with a diversity
of contexts or a plurality of perspectives is always deeply
political. Negotiations among contending knowledges
and divergent interests across multiple actors inevitably
involves politics: confronting disparate views, interests and
forms of incumbent power [114]. Wider political institutions, economic systems and technical infrastructures
www.sciencedirect.com

Transformations to Sustainability: structural, systemic and enabling approaches Scoones et al. 71

inevitably shape what happens and what might be possible.
But taking an enabling approach means a focus on agency
and the capacities of actors to open up opportunities, often
in surprising alliances.

and when such mobilization is occurring and what such
movements imply for the meaning, process and direction
of transformative change is fundamental to achieving the
aspirations articulated in the SDGs.

Both in the Xochimilco wetland and in the city of Gurgaon in
India, different perspectives on sustainability again play a
key role. In the case of Gurgaon, participatory practices
around the Gurgaon Water Forum have been able to make
a significant impact on the imaginations, values and interests
of public administrators, resident welfare associations and
citizen groups working to transform urban planning and
governance [115]. In the Xochimilco wetland, local farmers
see degradation of the wetland ecosystem as a result of
decline in traditional systems of land use and commodification of the area by urban elites. For them, transformation is
about resistance in the face of the power of development
plans and elite control. However, an expected change in
political leadership and new opportunities presented by
Mexico City’s embrace of planning for resilience are
now providing new platforms for action. The case underscores not only the interlinked nature of sustainability goals,
but also that the pathways to these goals will require
negotiation, contestation and alliance-building. Taking
diverse knowledges — including values and moral
positions — seriously helps reframe dominant policy
narratives in formal political arenas. This broadens out what
is taken into account and opens up possibilities for change:
challenging discursive closures that exclude alternative
pathways.

Emancipatory transformations to
sustainability

Likewise in peri-urban Delhi, India, alliances of citizen
environmentalists are addressing toxic pollution using a
range of strategies from legal activism to citizen science
monitoring [57]. Strategic alignments between activist
interventions and some within the state or business are
challenging established pathways and opening up
opportunities for change [59]. A focus on social innovation
helps move the emphasis away from technological fixes or
instrumental policy intervention and towards the
realizing of entirely new possibilities. This requires
thinking deliberately about where the chinks lie in the
armour of power — and what the opportunities might
be for tactical alliances. It means looking for political
openings: in who has the capacity to act and what mobilizations are required to challenge incumbent interests
and constraining structures. Alongside more conventional
‘academic rigour’, then, taking politics seriously also
emphasises ‘political rigour’ — where diverse people
and knowledges challenge prevailing power in collective
political interventions. Many examples can be found in
environmental justice struggles around the world; for
instance in the hundreds of cases documented in the
global ‘EJ-Atlas’ or Latin American ‘Grupo Confluencias’
initiatives [60]. Political rigour of course entails significant
risks and costs, and such risks can be debilitating for
transformative action. Nevertheless, attention to how
www.sciencedirect.com

Achieving the SDGs by 2030 will require massive
transformations in economies, societies and politics. If such
transformations are to be not only ecologically beneficial, but
emancipatory for the most marginalised people, then
approaches are required that are at once structural, systemic
and enabling. Structural or systemic approaches may underpin analysis and offer strategic responses, whether through
informing social movements or guiding policy interventions
that aim to elevate small-scale niche experiments beyond
the local. Complementary enabling approaches may also
draw upon these analyses whilst focusing on fostering
agency, values and capacities for emancipatory change. This
requires embedding the three principles proposed here:
taking seriously diverse knowledges, plural pathways and
the inherently political nature of transformations. This paper
offers some pointers for thinking more deeply about these
challenges — and for translating results into action-oriented
practice, as illustrated by the examples discussed.
Combining recognition for deep structural realities as well
as vibrant social possibilities, these three principles help
open up space for new social and technical innovations, as
well as deliberation, contestation and democratic debate.
These qualities are each individually essential — as well as
collectively necessary — for achieving both the SDGs and
the wider ambitions of sustainability.

Conflict of interest statement
Nothing declared.

Acknowledgements
This paper has emerged from the collective work of the ESRC STEPS
Centre and Consortium (Grant Number ES/I021620/10). All authors are
members of the STEPS Global Consortium (https://steps-centre.org/global/)
and the ‘Pathways’ Transformative Knowledge Network, which has been
supported by Transformations to Sustainability programme, which is
coordinated by the International Science Council (ISC) and funded by the
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida).

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.

Steffen W et al.: Planetary boundaries: guiding human
development on a changing planet. Science (80-) 2015, 347.

2.

Rockström J et al.: A safe operating space for humanity. Nature
2009, 461:472-475.

3.

Raworth K: A Safe and Just Space for Humanity: Can We Live Within
the Doughnut? . Available (November 2019) at: Oxford: Oxfam; 2012
https://www-cdn.oxfam.org/s3fs-public/file_attachments/
dp-a-safe-and-just-space-for-humanity-130212-en_5.pdf.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

72 The state of knowledge on social transformations to sustainability

4.


Leach M et al.: Equity and sustainability in the anthropocene: a
social–ecological systems perspective on their intertwined
futures. Glob Sustain 2018, 1
This important review by some of the leading authorities in the field,
summarizes the state of knowledge concerning the interlinked challenges
of equity and sustainability. Emphasizing that they cannot be addressed
separately, it outlines emerging new thinking which recognizes the multiple perspectives and dimensions involved.

24. Scoones I: The politics of sustainability and development. Annu
Rev Environ Resour 2016:1-27

In a field increasingly subject to pressures for professionalization and
instrumentalization, this paper offers an up-to-date state-of-the art review
of the hitherto often unduly neglected political aspects of relations
between sustainability and development. Examining political dimensions
both of patterns of resource use and of scarcity, it discusses technologyled, market-led, state-led, and citizen-led processes of change.

5.

Feola G: Societal transformation in response to global
environmental change: a review of emerging concepts. Ambio
2014, 44:376-390.

25. Marx K: Capital: a Critique of Political Economy - Volume 1.
Harmondsworth: Penguin; 1976.

6.

Pelling M: Transformation: a renewed window on development
responsibility for risk management. J Extreme Events 2014, 1 p.
1402003.

7.

Blythe J et al.: The dark side of transformation: latent risks in
contemporary sustainability discourse. Antipode 2018,
50:1206-1223.

8. Scoones I, Newell P, Leach M: The Politics of Green
 Transformations. London: Earthscan Routledge; 2015
Resulting from a series of conferences and workshops held by the Global
Consortium for Social Technological and Environmental Pathways to
Sustainability (STEPS), this state-of-the-art edited volume contains a
series of chapters summarizing key divergent perspectives on transformations to sustainability.
9.

W.-P. G, Arnott J, Mach K: Transforming science-society
engagement and generating actionable knowledge for
environmental sustainability under global change. Curr Opin
Environ Sustain 2020.

10. Patterson J, Schulz K, Vervoort J, Van Der Hel S, Sethi M,
Barau A: Exploring the governance and politics of
transformations towards sustainability. Environ Innov Soc
Transitions 2017, 24:1-16.

26. Lenin VI: Revolution, Democracy, Socialism. London: Pluto Press;
2008.
27. Gramsci A: Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio
Gramsci. New York: International Publishers; 1971.
28. Davis M: Old Gods, New Enigmas - Marx’s Lost Theory. London:
Verso; 2018.
29. Mouffe C: For a Left Populism. London: Verso; 2018.
30. Jackson T: Prosperity without growth London. Available
(November 2019) at: http://www.sd-commission.org.uk/data/files/
publications/prosperity_without_growth_report.pdf.
31. Lara LG, Pereira LM, Ravera F, Jiménez-Aceituno A: Flipping the
tortilla: social-ecological innovations and traditional
ecological knowledge for more sustainable agri-food systems
in spain. Sustainability 2009, 11.
32. Martı́nez-alier J, Pascual U, Vivien F, Zaccai E: Sustainable degrowth: mapping the context, criticisms and future prospects
of an emergent paradigm. Ecol Econ 2010, 69:1741-1747.
33. Kallis G, Kerschner C, Martinez-Alier J: The economics of
degrowth. Ecol Econ 2012, 84:172-180.

11. Hackmann AL, St. Clair H: Transformative cornerstones of
social science research for global change. Int Soc Sci Counc
Paris 2013, 4:117-152.

34. Kaijser A, Kronsell A: Climate change through the lens of
intersectionality. Environ Polit 2014, 23:417-433.

12. O’Brien K: Global environmental change III: closing the gap
between knowledge and action. Prog Hum Geogr 2012,
37:587-596.

35. Maina-okori NM, Koushik JR, Wilson A: Reimagining
intersectionality in environmental and sustainability
education: a critical literature review. J Environ Educ 2018,
49:286-296.

13. Leach M, Scoones I, Stirling A: Dynamic Sustainabilities:
Technology, Environment, Social Justice. London: Earthscan;
2010.
14. Stirling A: Pluralising progress: from integrative transitions to
transformative diversity. Environ Innov Soc Transitions 2011,
1:82-88.
15. Smith A, Stirling A, Berkhout F: The governance of sustainable
socio-technical transitions. Res Policy 2005, 34:1491-1510.
16. Schot J, Steinmueller WE: New directions for innovation
studies: missions and transformation. Res Poliicy 2018,
47:1583-1584.
17. Stirling A: Emancipating transformations: from controlling ‘the
transition’ to culturing plural radical progress. The Politics of
Green Transformations. London: Routledge; 2015, 54-67.
18. Kates RW, Travis WR, Wilbanks TJ: Transformational adaptation
when incremental adaptations to climate change are
insufficient. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012, 109:7156-7161.
19. Newell P: The politics of green transformations in capitalism. In
The Politics of Green Transformation. Edited by Scoones I, Leach
M, Newel P. London: Earthscan; 2015.
20. Foster JB, Clark B, York R: The Ecological Rift: Capitalism’s War on
the Earth. New York: Monthly Review Press; 2010.
21. D’Alisa G, Demaria F, Kallis G (Eds): Degrowth: a Vocabulary for a
New Era. London: Routledge; 2015.

36. Fraser N: A triple movement? New Left Rev 2013, 81:119-132.
37. Wainwright H: A New Politics From the Left. Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons; 2018.
38. Abrol D: Conditions for the achievement of pharmaceutical
innovation for sustainable development: lessons from India.
World Rev Sci Technol Sustain Dev 2006, 3.
39. Meadows DH: System dynamics meets the press. Syst Dyn Rev
1989, 5:69-80.
40. Meadows DH, Meadows DL, Randers J: Beyond the Limits: Global
Collapse or A Sustainable Future. London: Earthscan Publications
Ltd; 1992. Earthscan.
41. Holling CS: Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annu
Rev Ecol Syst 1973, 4:1-23.
42. Folke C, Carpenter SR, Walker B, Scheffer M, Chapin T,
Rockström J: Resilience thinking: integrating resilience,
adaptability and transformability. Ecol Soc 2010, 15.
43. Berkes F, Colding J, Folke C (Eds): Social-ecological Systems:
Building Resilience For Complexity and Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2003.
44. Brown K: Global Environmental Change I: A Social Turn For
Resilience? Prog Hum Geogr 2013, 38(1):107-117.
45. Westley F et al.: Tipping toward sustainability: emerging
pathways of transformation. Ambio 2011, 40:762-780.

22. O’Brien K, O’Brien K: Global environmental change II: from
adaptation to deliberate transformation. Prog Hum Geogr 2012,
36:667-676.

46. Olsson P, Galaz V, Boonstra WJ: Sustainability transformations:
a resilience perspective. Ecol Soc 2014, 19.

23. Grin J, Rotmans J, Schot J, Geels F, Loorbach D: Transitions to
Sustainable Development: New Directions in the Study of Long
Term Transformative Change. London: Routledge; 2010.

47. Folke C: Resilience: the emergence of a perspective for social–
ecological systems analyses. Glob Environ Change 2006,
16:253-267.

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

www.sciencedirect.com

Transformations to Sustainability: structural, systemic and enabling approaches Scoones et al. 73

48. Geels FW: Technological transitions as evolutionary
reconfiguration processes: a multi-level perspective and a
case-study. Res Policy 2002, 31:1257-1274.
49. Rip A, Kemp R: Technological change. In Human Choice and
climate change: an international assessment. Edited by Rayner S,
Malone EL. Columbus: Batelle Press; 1998:327-399.
50. Geels F: Technological Transitions and System Innovations: a Coevolutionary and Socio-technical Analysis. Cheltenham, UK;
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar; 2005.
51. Loorbach D, Rotmans J: The practice of transition
management: examples and lessons from four distinct cases.
Futures 2010, 42:237-246.
52. Kern F: Energy transitions and deliberate transition
management: implementing the green economy. Okol
Wirtschaften 2013, 3:20-23.
53. Geels FW: Regime resistance against low carbon transitions:
introducing politics and power into the multi-level
perspective. Theory Cult Soc 2014, 31:21-40.
54. Raven R, Ghosh B, Wieczorek A, Stirling A, Ghosh D, Jolly S,

Karjangtimapron E, Prabudhanitisarn S, Roy J, Sangawongse S,
Sengers F: Unpacking sustainabilities in diverse transition
contexts: solar photovoltaic and urban mobility experiments
in India and Thailand. Sustain. Sci. 2017, 12(4):579-596
Focusing on two key fields for sustainability transformations in two urban
settings in the Global South, this paper explores a dimension that is
unusual in the ‘technological transitions’ field, in that it systematically
analyses a number of dimensions of diversity in the framing both of
sustainability and transformation.
55. Seyfang G: The new economics of sustainable consumption:
seeds of change. Basingstoke. Palgrave Macmillan; 2008.
56. Pansera M, Owen R: Framing inclusive innovation within the

discourse of development: insights from case studies in India.
Res Policy 2017, 47:23-34
Exploring ideas and practices around ‘inclusive innovation’ in an important setting in the Global South, this provides a useful and authoritative
overview of a concept that is becoming increasingly prominent in discussions of transformations to sustainability.
57. Abrol D: Embedding technology in community-based
production systems through people’s technology initiatives:
lessons from the Indian experience. Int J Technol Manag Sustain
Dev 2005, 4:3-20.
58. Schmitz H: Green transformation: is there a fast track? In The
Politics of Green Transformations. Edited by Scoones I, Leach M,
Newell P. London: Routledge; 2015.
59. Meadowcroft J: Engaging with the politics of sustainability
transitions. Environ Innov Soc Transitions 2011, 1:70-75.
60. Temper L, Walter M, Rodriguez I, Kothari A, Turhan E: A
perspective on radical transformations to sustainability:
resistances, movements and alternatives. Sustain Sci 2018,
13:747-764.
61. Shove E, Walker G: CAUTION! Transitions ahead: politics,
practice, and sustainable transition management. Environ Plan
A 2007, 39:763-770.
62. Moore M-L, Olsson P, Nilsson W, Rose L, Westley FR: Navigating
emergence and system reflexivity as key transformative
capacities: experiences from a Global Fellowship program.
Ecol Soc 2018, 23.
63. Drimie S, Hamann R, Manderson AP, Mlondobozi N: Creating
transformative spaces for dialogue and action: reflecting on
the experience of the Southern Africa Food Lab. Ecol Soc
2018, 23.
64. Brien KO: Political agency: the key to tackling climate change.
Science (80-) 2015, 350.
65. Sools A, Hein Mooren J: Towards narrative futuring in
psychology: becoming resilient by imagining the future. Grad J
Soc Sci 2012, 9:203.
66. Bandura A: Toward a psychology of human agency. Perspect
Psychol Sci 2006, 1:164-180.
www.sciencedirect.com

67. Pereira LM, Karpouzoglou T, Frantzeskaki N, Olsson P: Designing
 transformative spaces for sustainability in social-ecological
systems. Ecol Soc 2018, 23
Providing an overview of an important state-of-the art special issue, this
article summarises current experience in the building of transformative
spaces, which is all the more valuable for redressing the neglect elsewhere of attention to initiatives undertaken in the Global South.
68. Hulme M: Why We Disagree About Climate Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ Press; 2009.
69. Stirling A: Transforming power: social science and the politics
of energy choices. Energy Res Soc Sci 2014, 1:83-95.
70. Stirling A: Engineering and sustainability: control and care in
unfoldings of modernity. In Routledge Companion to the

Philosophy of Engineering, , vol. 06. Edited by Michelfelder DP,
Doorn N. London: Routledge; 2019
Addressing a key distinguishing feature of ‘enabling’ approaches to
transformation, this paper explores the contrast between ‘caring’ and
‘controlling’ approaches to sustainability– and examines the ways in
which the latter understanding is constantly pressurised in the colonialities of contemporary globalising modernity.
71. Mouffe C: The Return of the Political. London: Verso; 1993.
72. Fraser N: Can society be commodities all the way down?
Polanyian reflections on capitalist crisis. FMSH 2012.
18 August 2012.
73. Hall AJ, Yoganand B, Sulaiman RV, C.N.G (Eds): Post-harvest
Innovations in Innovation: Reflections on Partnership and Learning.
Patancheru: Crop Post-Harvest Programme, South Asia; 2003.
74. Abrol D: Pro-poor innovation-making, knowledge production
and technology implementation for rural areas: lessons from
the Indian experience. In Innovation in India: Melting Economic
Growth with Inclusive Development. Edited by Ramani S.
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ Press; 2014.
75. Pereira LM, Hichert T, Hamann M, Preiser R, Biggs R: Using

futures methods to create transformative spaces: visions of a
good Anthropocene in southern Africa. Ecol Soc 2018, 23
Organised around the key concept of the Anthropocene, which features
strongly in much discussion of sustainability transformations, this paper
provides a useful contemporary analysis from a Global Southern perspective of the value of futures methods in addressing challenges of
complexity, diversity, and uncertainty.
76. Galafassi D et al.: Stories in social-ecological knowledge
cocreation. Ecol Soc 2018, 23

Drawing on contemporary experience with knowledge co-creation processes for sustainability transformations in in Kenya and Mozambique,
this paper usefully analyzes the role of techniques for fostering “shared
conceptual repertoires” in order to facilitate communicative spaces.
77. Dyer M: Transforming communicative spaces: the rhythm of
gender in meetings in rural Solomon Islands. Ecol Soc 2018, 23.
78. Marshall F, Dolley J, Priya R: Transdisciplinary research as

transformative space making for sustainability: enhancing
propoor transformative agency in periurban contexts. Ecol
Soc 2018, 23
Drawing on research undertaken around Delhi, this paper analyses the
role of transdisciplinary development research (TDR) in building sustainability transformations. Extending attention beyond this, the authors
explore a novel idea of ‘transformative space making’ (TSM) as a means
to cocreate solution-oriented knowledge focusing especially on contending power relations.
79. Arora S: Defying Control: Aspects of Caring Engagement Between
Divergent Knowledge Practices. Brighton: STEPS Centre; 2017.
80. Hebinck A, Vervoort JM, Hebinck P, Rutting L, Galli F: Imagining

transformative futures: participatory foresight for food
systems change. Ecol Soc 2018, 23
Drawing on research in southern Africa, this paper focuses on the
potential roles that might be played by the deliberate envisioning of
positive futures is a first step in creating a shared understanding and
commitment towards radical transformations toward sustainability.
81. Born B, Purcell M: Avoiding the local trap: scale and food systems
in planning research. J Plan Educ Res 2006, 26:195-207.
82. Brown JC, Purcell M: There’s nothing inherent about scale:
political ecology, the local trap, and the politics of
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

74 The state of knowledge on social transformations to sustainability

development in the Brazilian Amazon. Geoforum 2005,
36:607-624.
83. Eakin H: The ‘turn to capacity’ in vulnerability research. In
Applied Studies in Climate Adaptation. Edited by Palutikof D,
Boulter JP, Barnett S, Rissik J. Chichester: John Wiley; 2015.
84. Jasanoff S: Just transitions: a humble approach to global
energy futures. Energy Res Soc Sci 2018, 35:11-14.
85. Mitchell T: Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age of Oil.
London: Verso; 2011.
86. Bulkeley H et al.: Governing climate change transnationally:
assessing the evidence from a database of sixty initiatives.
Environ Plan C Polit Sp 2014, 30:591-612.
87. Kuzemko C, Mitchell C, Lockwood M, Hoggett R: Policies,
politics and demand side innovations: the untold story of
Germany’s energy transition. Energy Res Soc Sci 2017,
28:58-67.
88. Smith A, Raven R: What is protective space? Reconsidering
niches in transitions to sustainability. Res Policy 2012,
41:1025-1036.
89. Folke C, Hahn T, Olsson P, Norberg J: Adaptive governance of
social-ecological systems. Annu Rev Environ Resour 2005,
30:441-473.
90. Ockwell D et al.: Can pay-as-you-go, digitally enabled business
models support sustainability transformations in developing
countries? Outstanding questions and a theoretical basis for
future research. Sustainability 2019, 11:1-21.
91. Smith A, Fressoli M, Abrol D, Around E, Ely A: Grassroots
Innovation Movements. London: Routledge Earthscan; 2016.
92. Smith A, Stirling A: Innovation, sustainability and democracy:
 an analysis of grassroots contributions. J Self-Governance
Manag Econ 2018, 6:64-97
The role of democratic struggle and grassroots mobilization is a crucial
but arguably underemphasized theme in much high-level policy discussion of sustainability transformations– especially in relation to science,
technology and innovation. This paper provides a useful general overview
of key current themes in this field.
93. STEPS Centre: Innovation, Sustainability, Development: A New
Manifesto. . Available (November 2019) at: Brighton: STEPS
Centre; 2010 In: https://steps-centre.org/publication/
innovation-sustainability-development-a-new-manifesto/.
94. Abrol D: Technological alternatives for Indian futures. In

Alternative Futures: India Unshackled. Edited by Kothari A, Joy KJ.
Delhi: Authors Upfront; 2017
In a courageous and farsighted volume by a diverse array of leading
scholars on issues on sustainability transformation, this chapter focuses
in particular on what key lessons from past radical critique of technology
have to offer for contemporary debates about the potential role for
technological alternatives.
95. Asafu-Adjaye J et al.: An Ecomodernist Manifesto. . Available
(November 2019) at: Washington: Breathrough Institute; 2015 In:
http://www.ecomodernism.org/.
96. Preiser R, Pereira LM, (Oonsie) Biggs R: Navigating alternative
 framings of human-environment interactions: variations on
the theme of ‘Finding Nemo,’. Anthropocene 2017, 20:83-87
This group of leading activist-scholars, working on sustainability transformations in Africa, usefully explore the practical implications of four
contending framings of human-environment interactions: the eco- modernist perspective, the planetary stewardship paradigm; the pathways to
sustainability approach; and the critical post-humanist paradigm. They
conclude by developing a novel synthetic approach based on ‘the
Anthropocene as responsibility’.
97. Van Zwanenberg P, Cremaschi A, Obaya M, Marin A,
 Lowenstein V: Seeking unconventional alliances and bridging
innovations in spaces for transformative change: the seed
sector and agricultural sustainability. Ecol Soc 2018, 23
This paper draws on experience in developing an important contemporary sustainability transformations intervention initiated in Argentina, concerning a radical new open source seed licensing system. Exploring the
implications well beyond the particular initial setting, this work offers a
compelling model for other kinds and applications of activist scholarship
in this field.
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

98. Marin A, Stubrin L, van Zwanenberg P, Van Zwanenberg P:
Developing Capabilities in the Seed Industry: Which Direction to
Follow? Brighton: Science Policy Research Unit; 2014. Available
(November 2019) at: http://sro.sussex.ac.uk/id/eprint/49232/.
99. Wright EO, Folbre N, Andersson J, Hearn J, Himmelweit S,
 Stirling A: Chapter 21. The multiple directions of social
progress: ways forward. International Panel on Social Progress:
Rethinking Society for the 21st Century. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2018
Convened as a global initiative to address crucial challenges in progressive visions of sustainability transformations, the International Panel on
Social Progress provides a comprehensive state-of-the-art review of
many key dimensions of associated political struggle.
100. Vogel C, Moser SC, Kasperson RE, Dabelko GD: Linking
vulnerability, adaptation, and resilience science to practice:
pathways, players, and partnerships. Glob Environ Change
2007, 17:349-364.
101. Tengö M, Brondizio ES, Elmqvist T, Malmer P, Spierenburg M:
Connecting diverse knowledge systems for enhanced
ecosystem governance: the multiple evidence base approach.
Ambio 2014, 43:579-591.
102. Marshall F: Recognising sustainability frontiers in the periurban. South Asian Water Stud 2016, 5:98-102.
103. Jasanoff S (Ed): States of Knowledge: the Co-production of
Science and Social Order. London: Routledge; 2004.
104. Pereira L, Karpouzoglou T, Doshi S, Frantzeskaki N: Organising a
safe space for navigating social-ecological transformations to
sustainability. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2015, 12:6027-6044.
105. Pereira L, Frantzeskaki N, Hebinck A, Charli L, Scott J, Dyer M:
Transformative spaces in the making : key lessons from nine
cases in the Global South. Sustain Sci 2019:1-18.
106. Wittmayer JM, Scha N: Action, research and participation: roles
of researchers in sustainability transitions. Sustain Sci 2014,
9:483-496.
107. Charli-Joseph L, Siqueiros-Garcia JM, Eakin H, Manuel Navarrete D, Shelton R: Promoting agency for social-ecological
transformation: a transformation-lab in the Xochimilco socialecological system. Ecol Soc 2018, 23
This team of activist-researchers working in Mexico City describe an
important initiative in the peri-urban Xochimilco wetland, in which an
innovative ‘T-lab’ experiment explored a compelling hybrid participatoryanalytic approach towards the building of genuinely bottom-up transformative spaces– aiming to create conditions for ‘endogenous
transformations’.
108. Pereira L, Drimie S, Zgambo O, Biggs RO: Planning for change:
Transformation Labs for an alternative food system in the Western
Cape. . Stellenbosch, South Africa 2018.
109. Ely A, Marin A: Learning about ‘Engaged Excellence’ across a
 transformative knowledge network. IDS Bull 2016, 47
Coordinating a successful sustainability transformations collaborative
research initiative across four continents, the authors reflect on key
general lessons arising across the diverse approaches and settings. A
number of practical conclusions arise for the conduct of a ‘pathways
approach’ to ‘engaged excellence’.
110. Sharpe B, Hodgson A, Leicester G, Lyon A, Fazey I: Three
horizons: a pathways practice for transformation. Ecol Soc
2016, 21:47.
111. Yang A, Jiang L, Ely C: A study of ‘Green Unemployed Groups’
from a resilience perspective. Guizhou Soc Sci 2018, 347:135-142.
112. Eakin H, Shelton R, Siqueiros-Garcia JM, Charli-Joseph L,
Manuel-Navarrete D: Loss and social-ecological
transformation: Pathways of change in Xochimilco, Mexico.
Ecol Soc 2020, 24(3):1-15.
113. Eames M, Mcdowall W: Sustainability, foresight and
contested futures: exploring visions and pathways in the
transition to a hydrogen economy. Technol Anal Strateg
Manag 2010, 22:671-692.
114. Stirling A: How deep is incumbency? A ‘configuring fields’
approach to redistributing and reorienting power in socio
material change. Energy Res Soc Sci 2019, 58:101239
www.sciencedirect.com

Transformations to Sustainability: structural, systemic and enabling approaches Scoones et al. 75

This paper explores the extent to which the global patterns of incumbency
implicated in sustainabilty challenges can exercise conditioning effects even
on the content of research concerning possibilities for progressive social
transformations. Diagnosing resulting tendencies to adopt’ eagle-eye’ views
of change processes, it proposes an alternative’ worm-eye’ view that better
recognizes (and so may help enable) a stronger role for democratic struggle.
115. Abrol D: Intervening for the sustainable transformation of
 urban environment and water management in Gurgaon:

www.sciencedirect.com

learning from the creation of a multistakeholder platform in
India. Front Environ Health Rev 2020. Forthcoming
This paper recounts experience of a key case mentioned in the present
article, arising from many years of activist research in the northern Indian
city of Gurgaon. The Gurgaon Water Forum offers a model for engaging
the imaginations, values and interests of public administrators, resident
welfare associations and citizen groups in transformative urban
planning.

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 2020, 42:65–75

