Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Marine Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/marpol

Untangling theories of transformation: Reflections for ocean governance
Tegan Evans a, b, *, Stephen Fletcher a, Pierre Failler b, c, Jonathan Potts a, b
a

The School of the Environment, Geography and Geosciences, Buckingham Building, Lion Terrace, Portsmouth PO1 3HE, UK
Centre for Blue Governance, Faculty of Economics and Law, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth P01 3DE, UK
c
Economics and Finance Group, Portsmouth Business School, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Transformation
Transformative change
Ocean governance
Socio-ecological system
Socio-technical system
Transition

Transformation as a concept has gained prominence in environmental governance as a proposed solution to the
plethora of major global crises facing ocean spaces. Recent analysis has begun exploring the concept within the
context of ocean governance. However, the question of how transformation is achieved is hindered by a
perceived lack of clarity, multiple interpretations of the concept, and its growing buzzword status. This
comprehensive review untangles theories of transformation in the context of ocean governance by proposing a
conceptual ‘Taxonomy of Transformation’ and synthesises key attributes of definitions of transformation. Con­
ceptualisations of transformation converge around depth of change, but have different interpretations of speed
and scale, which highlight potential risks to implementing transformation. In light of this, this review proposes
an interpretation of transformation in ocean governance that synthesises multiple theoretical perspectives, and
moves towards a more contextually nuanced and less prescriptive approach to transformation.

1. Introduction
Arguably, ocean management is not fit for purpose [19,34]. Despite
the awareness of humanity’s dependence on the ocean for everything
from climate regulation to sustenance, the increasing extent, diversity
and negative impacts of human activity in ocean spaces is unprece­
dented [41]. Globally, the ‘Blue Acceleration’ into ocean environments
has led to increased commercialisation, resulting in the dominance of
100 corporations over the ocean economy [41,75]. The triple threat of
climate change, biodiversity loss, and pollution are direct consequences
of human activities on nature and are ‘self-inflicted’ crises [74]. Efforts
to address these challenges have had mixed results. The Aichi Biodi­
versity Targets have not been met [66]. The Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) are failing to catalyse the action needed to achieve sus­
tainable development [8,12]. Progress to achieving SDG 14 in particular
has been limited [3]. Fragmented ocean management has not prevented
these crises and lacks capacity to provide the multiple simultaneous
solutions needed [20]. The failure to agree upon the Biodiversity Beyond
National Jurisdiction (BBNJ) Treaty earlier in 2022 is evidence of this
inability to manage ocean spaces.
In light of these failures, increasing demands are being made for a
change in the relationship between humanity and oceans [63]. Given the
recognition of the interconnectivity and compounding nature of these

crises, there is a strong call for transformative change as a solution [64,
73,74].
Transformation is not a new concept to global governance, particu­
larly in the context of sustainability and climate change. It is seen to
evoke an ambitious and innovative context for change [9]. However, it is
an amorphous term, used often without definition leading to its
perception as a buzzword [9,71]. If it is condemned to such status, its
power to catalyse change will diminish rapidly.
Transformation is invoked as a concept in multiple ways, ranging
from prescriptive and normative within policy, to descriptive and
analytical with academia [9,13]. Beyond its invocation in global policy,
there is limited understanding of what this term entails. Narratives
surrounding the objective of transformation in ocean spaces are
expansive, including “what we do, how we do it, and who influences”
([27], p. 2). Beyond broad agreement that change is needed in ocean
spaces, there is no consensus as to what this looks like or how it is
achieved. Therefore, there is a practical question around what the
concept means and how this influences its operationalisation.
In 2012, O’Brien wrote a seminal paper that outlined the “surprising
and disconcerting” lack of literature and knowledge surrounding the
concept of transformation as a response to global crises. It has been
continually reinforced that transformation lacks cohesive theoretical
understanding (as outlined by Shove [67] and re-asserted by Blythe

* Corresponding author at: The School of the Environment, Geography and Geosciences, Buckingham Building, Lion Terrace, Portsmouth PO1 3HE, UK.
E-mail address: tegan.evans@port.ac.uk (T. Evans).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2023.105710
Received 28 September 2022; Received in revised form 6 April 2023; Accepted 1 June 2023
Available online 6 June 2023
0308-597X/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

et al., [9]) and does not have an established set of practices or norms.
This review adopts these hypotheses, along with [53] observation that
transformation means ‘‘different things to different people or groups” as
a baseline for a literature review. Since [53] publication, the concept of
transformation has experienced swift growth within literature and pol­
icy circles, with debate spanning potential avenues and pathways of
transformation, and what the term means in practice. Therefore, a
practical definition of transformation is required to ensure that the
various initiatives implemented under these calls for transformation
follow the similar guiding attributes.
This paper provides a timely review of the landscape of trans­
formation in academic literature and begins to untangle the character­
istics of transformation specifically in ocean governance. Mapping the
landscape of existing theorisations of transformation through the
proposition of a heuristic Taxonomy of Transformation in Section 2 al­
lows for exploration of the attributes of transformation from a multi­
disciplinary perspective. The major attributes of transformation are
discussed, including conceptual advances, debates, and gaps in the field
of transformation. Finally, a definition of transformation in ocean
governance is synthesised.
In framing and identifying transformation as a solution to the mul­
tiple crises facing oceans, this review focuses on deliberate trans­
formations (which are a result of human agency) and excludes emergent
transformations which do not result from human agency [26]. The
limitation of adopting agency as an intrinsic element of transformation
is the presumption that transformation must have a determined end
point. This is not true, transformations can start with no clear consensus
as to what the end goal of change is. At some scales, this may be pref­
erable as it allows for reflexive learning to guide transformation.

such as general systems change literature, climate change adaptation,
and transition literature. Following the snowball technique, a further
106 articles were reviewed that were not immediately identified
through the Boolean Search. It is also noted that through the search
methods employed, ‘blue’ was not included as a search term, meaning
that literature such as blue justice, blue governance or other
process-oriented approaches to transformation have not been included
as part of this review.
2. Taxonomy of transformation
Transformation means different things to different people [53],
resulting in an urgent need for transparency in its use. This review
identified 43 distinct definitions of transformation, which were
reviewed for content and construction with the aim of identifying the
characteristics of and theoretical implications within different con­
ceptualisations of transformation. First, the major theoretical ap­
proaches to transformation are identified.
It is well identified that transformation can be loosely separated into
different theoretical backgrounds [6,10], allowing for it to be mapped in
a pseudo-taxonomical fashion (Fig. 1). These include socio-ecological
systems (SES), socio-technical systems (STS), and general systems
thinking approaches to transformation. Additional non-systemic ap­
proaches to transformation were identified, including social and politi­
cal theories of transformation, theories of change and organisational
change management. These are discussed further in Section 2.4.
From these high-level system framings, further approaches to
transformation can be identified, differing in characteristics, processes
and type of transformation analysed. Significant conceptual differences
and debate exist within these theories, resulting in a messy and sporadic
theoretical landscape with both divergence and synergy. From a prac­
tical perspective, the challenge is therefore not a lack of understanding
of transformation, but rather that there are many different theoretical
directions in which transformation can be understood. This is simulta­
neously a virtue and limitation, with the plurality of interpretation
arguably necessary when considering the magnitude of change evoked
through ‘transformation.’ However, from a practical perspective, it
seems as if almost anything can be defined as transformative with there
being little unifying characteristics, processes or conceptualisations
identified. It is daunting to translate this complexity into a practical
context, which heightens the risk of greenwashing and adopting
business-as-usual practices under the banner of transformation.
Thus, a rounded definition in the context of ocean governance is
required, which synthesises and evaluates the different theoretical ap­
proaches. As a field, it lacks cohesive direction, as explored in Section 3.
Many uses of transformation do not have an explicitly identified
theoretical background. Instead, many adopt a holistic disciplinary
perspective, using elements of SES, STS and general systems thinking
principles in their conceptualisations of transformation. Papers often
discussed theories such as adaptation or transition, which were
commonly associated with either a SES or STS framing but did not
explicitly incorporate the broader theories of such a framing. This move
to a theoretically blended understanding of transformation is reflected
in literature, as evidenced in the framing of socio-ecological-technical
systems, and a growth in literature exploring the synergies and poten­
tial lessons of SES, STS and transition approaches to change. There is
significant opportunity for learning from these different perspectives
and adopting a more blended and holistic approach to conceptualisa­
tions of transformation.
This review and the existing variety of classifications (such as Nalau
and Handmer [52] and Feola [23]) shows that existing attempts to un­
derstand transformation do not exist in neatly defined silos, and sig­
nificant conceptual overlaps exist between these categories. Imposing
strict delineations onto these resultant theories is a complex and a futile
endeavour, and a multi-disciplinary approach to transformation should
be adopted. The remainder of the section details the major similarities

1.1. Research design
This review adopts the position that transformation as a concept does
not and should not belong to a single academic discipline. Despite this
review targeting scientific literature and interpretations of trans­
formation, it is recognised that diverse knowledge forms, such as art,
historical knowledge, and ingenious knowledge, are vital in exploring
the societal connotations and understandings of transformation. How­
ever, it is recognised that the exclusion of these forms of knowledge in
this review is a critical barrier to a full and holistic interpretation of
transformation. The primary purpose of this review is to situate and
contextualise transformation in scientific literature, incorporating in­
sights from different perspectives, such as climate, sustainable devel­
opment, and biodiversity governance where relevant and does not limit
scope of literature included.
A Boolean Search was used to identify key literature, using search
terms “transformation” AND “transformative governance” AND “trans­
formative ocean governance” in literature databases such as Google
Scholar, Web of Science and Scopus. From this initial sample of papers, a
snowball methodology was used to identify further relevant literature,
whereby papers that were not initially included in the review were
identified from citations in identified papers. Prior to analysis, titles and
abstracts were reviewed for relevance; Literature was excluded based on
breadth of perspective, for example, if titles and abstracts focused too
narrowly on technical elements of transition management (such as Geels
and Schot’s [29] typology of transitions). Literature was also rejected if
it outlined reasons for transformation, or incited a call for change, rather
than discussing transformation as a concept.
Given that this review seeks to reassert if a “surprising and discon­
certing” lack of literature and knowledge surrounding transformation
[53] still exits, papers published prior to 2012 were not included unless
needed to add detail or context to an earlier paper. The initial literature
search was conducted in May, 2022 and considering the rapid growth of
transformative literature, papers published between May and the sub­
mission date of September 2022 were also included where possible. 62
initial articles were reviewed in total, spanning various perspectives,
2

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

Fig. 1. Taxonomy of transformation literature identified. Where relevant, key papers have been identified, and key ocean papers are highlighted in grey. Conceptual
overlaps are indicated by dotted lines. This Taxonomy builds on previous categorization efforts by Feola [23] and Nalau and Handmer [52].

and differences between these different understandings of trans­
formation in order to propose a nuanced interpretation of trans­
formation in ocean governance in the context of scientific literature.

2.2. Socio-ecological systems
SES framing was the most common theoretical perspective identi­
fied, which is cognizant with Blythe et al.’s (2021) observation that SES
is the prevailing theory of transformation of ocean governance in both
policy and academia. Although many definitions of SES exist, it gener­
ally regards human and natural systems as interdependent and of equal
value [17,26]. Such a conceptualisation of the relationship between
society and ecology requires different “ontological and epistemological
commitments” resulting in different forms of governance ([32], p. 255;
[25]).
Conceptualisations of change within SES are difficult to untangle but
can be loosely separated into adaptation and resilience, with significant
synergy between the two. Both conceptualisations can be viewed as a
desired end state or desired inherent system characteristics. Adaptive
governance can simultaneously be regarded as a continuous process or
desired end state through which resilience thinking is employed.
Transformation is defined and deployed subtly differently within
these frames of thinking [59]. Adaptive governance adopts multiple
conceptualisations of transformation, as outlined in the proposed Tax­
onomy (Fig. 1). Adaptation conceptualises transformation either as part
of an adaptive response [57,60] or as an entirely separate and new
process [16,26,51,80]. Alternatively, transformational adaptation is a
specific and unique process [42]. Kates, Travis and Wilbanks [42]
outline three types of transformational adaptation: adaptation which
occurs at a larger scale, adaptations that are ‘truly new’ to a location or
resource system, adaptations that transform places. As such, trans­
formation in the context of adaptation can mean different things
depending on the specific theory ascribed to, necessitating clarity in
specifically what characteristics of change are ascribed to a trans­
formative process.
Resilience is defined as “the ability of a system to anticipate, adapt or

2.1. Systems thinking
Most of the theories and conceptualisations of transformation are
based on systems thinking, and the understanding of the world as a
dynamic, complex and multi-level system [23]. Systems thinking is a
well-established concept that is used in many disciplines and contexts,
from policy to organisational change. Concepts such as tipping points,
leverage points and feedback loops are used across differing approaches
to transformation, and are present in multiple narratives of change.
Using a systems perspective challenges a different way of understanding
and visualising the relationship between different elements of gover­
nance systems [50].
From this general systems perspective, transformation can be viewed
through the lens of SES or STS. Other framings exist, such as the socioinstitutional perspective, but these are less common in literature. In
general, these systemic framings can be divided by how the problem is
framed: if a problem is regarded as narrow or broad [14]. A narrow
problem can be solved by “applying greater expertise, more innovation,
and better management” and adopting a technocratic perspective ([54],
p. 154). In contrast, if a problem is viewed as broad, adaptive and
emergent approaches are used which can be framed as requiring “a new
way of viewing both problems and solutions” ([54], p. 154). While it is
tempting to frame transformation in ocean governance as a technical
problem, in reality the multilevel nature of the triple ocean crises can be
viewed as an “opportunity to radically rethink and rebuild” ([32], p.
256).

3

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

transform in the face of change” and is regarded as an important
governance approach in times of crises ([10,26], p. 242). In SES, the
distinction between transformation and resilience is contested. For
some, transformability is a fundamental characteristic of a resilient
system [23,26,79].
Transformation in the perspective of resilience has been explored in
an ocean governance context by Blythe et al., [11] and in a national
fisheries setting by Gelcich et al., [30], using the Olsson framework of
transformation [55]. This framework conceptualises transformation as a
deliberate and planned process, having three phases: (i) preparing for
transformation, (ii) navigating a transition, and (iii) building resilience
[55]. Both case studies identify the need for a ‘window of opportunity’
or tipping point to catalyse action to build resilience. It is not clear how
such tipping points or catalysts for change fit with the identified need for
deliberate transformation in ocean governance.

transition theories, theories of change are simultaneously a way of
conceptualising change, a process and a product [62]. No examples of
theories of change for ocean governance could be identified. While
theories of change have promise for facilitating change at an organisa­
tional level, it must be questioned how useful they are at delivering
change at a governance level, especially given the lack of critical
analyses.
3. Characteristics of transformative blue governance
Following an overview of the major theoretical silos and their ap­
proaches to transformation, it is necessary to distil the principal attri­
butes of transformation and discuss how these could inform an
interpretation of ocean governance transformation. This review
included analysis of the definitions used when discussing trans­
formation, and the broader characterisations of transformation. Echoing
the sentiments of Ziervogel, Cowen and Ziniades, [83] the pursuit of
defining transformation is undertaken with “trepidation.” In practice, it
is difficult to separate what transformation means, the proposed values
or principles of the end state of transformation, and how transformation
should be achieved. Often, these features are amalgamated into a sin­
gular definition. However, this review specifically focuses on the char­
acteristics of a transformative process and does not include analysis of
the principles or values of such a process as these are likely to be context
and scale dependent.
The following section is organised around three principal attributes
of transformation, which have been identified from the literature and
are outlined in Table 1. Fazey et al., [22] identify depth, breadth and
speed as indicative characteristics of transformation, and are also
consistent with the approach adopted by Linnér and Wibeck [46] in their
analysis of governance of transformations, and the assertion that
transformations must be deep, wide and enduring [21]. These indicative
attributes are similar to those identified by Termeer et al., [72] who
posit depth, scope and speed as defining traits from the perspective of
organisational change management.

2.3. Socio-technical systems
The socio-technical systems (STS) perspective encompasses interre­
lated social and technological processes [32] which particularly focus on
the roles of niche innovation to drive change [28]. Transition theory is
the dominant perspective applied within a STS framing, which is being
explored to facilitate change within SES [25]. Despite being most often
applied to constrained sub systems, such as energy, the concept of
transitions has been explored in the remit of ocean governance trans­
formations [43,63,70]. Transitions to a sustainable blue economy in
Brazil have also been explored [31].
Confusingly, transition and transformation are often used synony­
mously in literature [23,37,59] leading to the perception that they are
interchangeable. Emphasising the distinction between these terms is
imperative, as not only do they mean different things, but ascribe
different processes to achieve change. Temper et al., [71] distinguishes
between the two by virtue management, and notes that in contrast to
transformation, transition implies a controlled and manageable change
process. In this conceptualisation, transformation is a diverse and
emergent change which challenges existing structures [68,71].
Whether the terms exist synonymously, exclusively, or as a nested
pair depends largely on context. Multiple distinctions between the terms
exist. As identified by Stirling [68], a heuristic distinction can be made
between the two, with transition invoking processes that are controlled
and managed towards an identified end point of change. In an ocean
context, transition and transformation have been used interchangeably,
notably by Armitage, Marschke and van Tuyen [4] and Kelly et al., [44].
Transition and transformation can also be regarded as a duality [37].
Kok et al., [45] highlight the need to consider transition and trans­
formation in the context of biodiversity governance as part of an over­
arching process to achieve transformational change, using specific
transitions alongside generic social transformations. In other words,
using the practical insight of transition theory to facilitate trans­
formative change.

3.1. Breadth, scale and scope
The breadth of transformation is defined as the distribution of
change across a system and can be limited to single or multiple elements
of a system. Definitions of transformation differ in their degree of pre­
scriptiveness of breadth. Often, definitions will include dimensions
(such as societal, economic, and legal) that must be changed to achieve
transformation. The inclusion of such dimensions of change can give a
valuable insight into how transformation in a specific context can be
achieved. Some conceptualisations of transformation, such as VisserenHanmakers and Kok (2022), include the need for both societal and
personal levels of transformation. From a practical and policy
Table 1
Attributes of transformation, as identified by [22] and identified through the
literature review.

2.4. Organisational change management and theories of change
Two additional and non-systemic types of change were identified
throughout the review with different conceptualisations of how to
achieve transformation. Valuable lessons can be obtained by the analysis
of these less explored ways of approaching change. Organisational
change management has been explored from a climate perspective by
Termeer et al., [72], but no further exploration in the context of envi­
ronmental or ocean governance transformations could be identified.
Theories of change are usually an organisation’s vision statement of
the change they wish to achieve and are growing in popularity
throughout biodiversity and conservation science. The Convention on
Biological Diversity (2020) has proposed a Theory of Change which is
“expected to embody transformative change” ([56], p. 3). However, it is
not clear what transformation means in this context. Similar to
4

Identifying characteristics of transformation

Attributes identified in literature

Breadth or
scope

The distribution of change

Depth

The intensity of change

Speed

The timeframe in which
change occurs

• System wide
• Specific elements of society or
governance
• Non-linearity
• Dramatic, profound and
fundamental
• Radical
• Addressing root causes
• Reorganisation
• Creating new
• Irreversible or flexible
• Deliberate vs emergent
• Rapid
• Incremental

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

perspective, such prescriptiveness is also of benefit, as it facilitates a
deliverable and quantifiable interpretation of transformation.
In an oceans context, Blythe et al., [11], who adopts a resilience
perspective of transformation, include ‘structures, processes, rules and
norms’ as dimensions of change in transformative ocean governance. In
contrast, Kelly et al., [44] adopts a transitions perspective of trans­
formation of marine governance in Ireland that requires addressing
‘institutional, legislative, social, and economic’ factors. Both in­
terpretations of transformation are different by virtue of scale, context
and theoretical framing. The resilience underpinning of the first defi­
nition squarely focuses transformation at targeting intangible and un­
derpinning elements of a system, and implicitly advocates for a societal
approach to change. The technocratic underpinning of the second
definition regards the changes needed as being fairly prescriptive.
It is acknowledged here that there is no minimum prescribed breadth
or scope of change required for change to be transformative [21] as such
a description would be dependent on context and depth of change. For
example, it would be impossible to generically state that transformation
must target an entire system, or that it could be achieved by targeting
one single element of the system as change depends on the existing
system dynamics and distribution of power. In the context of urban
transformation, Eshuis and Gerrits [21] state that transformation must
be widely felt, and not limited to a specific system element. In the
context of ocean governance, a notoriously complex and fragmented
system, transitions to achieve transformation are often invoked in a
systemic context, recognising the need for multi-level and bottom-up
initiatives to catalyse change [43].
In the context of a transformation towards sustainability, governance
systems are a widely accepted, if often overlooked, avenue of delivering
transformative change across multiple system elements and scales [2,61,
70,73]. A further rationale for targeting governance in pursuit of ocean
transformation is the recognition that fundamentally inadequate
governance has allowed current crises to proliferate. The crises faced by
ocean environments are not novel or unique and are also observed
across biodiversity and climate governance. [38] observation that “the
climate crisis is more like a crisis of governance than a crisis of the
environment,” is true in the context of any governance system. Gover­
nance is therefore central to any form of change [2,59].
Governance is an often-nebulous term that encapsulates different
elements dependent on who is using it and in what context. Simply,
governance is “how power is directed to enable or constrain human
action” ([69], p. 3). [11] adopts a broader perspective of governance in
an ocean context, and identifies the role of structures, processes, rules
and norms in shaping decision-making, including how actors “share
power, assign responsibility, and ensure accountability in the use and
management of the marine environment.” From this perspective, ocean
governance has the capacity to set “the vision and conditions that enable
others to take action” ([45], p. 348). In adopting Blythe et al.’s (2021)
conceptualisation of governance, framings of transformation of, in, and
for governance are “focused on the role of current institutions, modes of
governance or characteristics” ([76], p. 86).
Situating transformation of governance requires precision about
what exactly is being discussed. There is often not a clear distinction in
literature [76]. [77] segregate between transformative change and
transformative governance, with “change referring to the actual shift
and governance to “steering” the shift.” Therefore, transformative
governance must result from deliberate human agency. The concept of
agency, particularly in transitions [81] and adaptive governance [82], is
well discussed. In acknowledging the role of agency in deliberate
transformation, transformation becomes “an inherently political act”
[39,59]. A rich literature examines the political nature of trans­
formation, and stresses the need for awareness around who is calling for
transformation, and who bears the costs and consequences of such
change through an evaluation of power [5,11,59,65]. As part of gover­
nance transformations, issues of power in ocean governance are often
discussed [6,9]. Redistributing or changing existing power structures

within a governance framework are regarded as critical to ensuring that
transformative efforts do not result in the same unequitable system that
preceded it [10].
Patterson et al., [59] outline three avenues of transformative
governance in literature: governance for transformations, governance of
transformations, and transformations in governance. Despite being
presented as separate avenues, these pathways are highly interdepen­
dent and have significant overlap. As such, these avenues of trans­
formation can be visualised as a cycle (Fig. 2).
In acknowledging the ‘environmental glass ceiling’ of trans­
formations, it is clear that governance systems themselves must be
transformed to achieve the radical change needed [35,36]. Therefore,
governance for transformations involves creating the governance con­
ditions necessary for transformation which in turn facilitates effective
governance of transformative processes. The creation of such enabling
conditions are likely to be transformative of the governance system and
of itself [72]. Therefore, situating governance as the scene of trans­
formation in ocean governance should result in broadscale change that
results in a system that is fundamentally new.
3.2. Depth
Depth of change refers to the distance of change from surface level, i.
e, the changing of deep elements of a system such as underlying logic,
values and assumptions rather than superficial surface level change. As
referenced in Section 3.1, this can be operationalised as the ‘intangible’
elements of a system. Again, it is critical to reflect on who is calling for
transformation, and how depth of change could be interpreted by them.
For example, in biodiversity governance it is recognised that trans­
formation does not stem from ambitious goals, and instead is galvanised
in transformation of “working arrangements, mechanisms and in­
stitutions” ([14,45], p. 348), or the hidden and underpinning parts of a
system.
Within the reviewed definitions of transformation, multiple ways of
describing the depth of transformation were employed. Descriptors
included fundamental, dramatic, profound, and radical, which while
subtly different, have largely synonymous connotations of the magni­
tude and depth required. These descriptors existed across theoretical
backgrounds, leading to the conclusion that regardless of theoretical
‘siloing’, the depth of change perceived as being needed for trans­
formation remains similar. This is congruent with the findings of Nalau
and Handmer [52], who found that a majority definitions of trans­
formation include ‘fundamental’ change. It often is agreed that more
than ‘small tweaks’ is needed to facilitate change [48]. Some definitions
of transformation explicitly reject the idea of small-scale (or incremen­
tal) change [9,47,58], and advocate that transformation must comprise
of change that is greater in magnitude [40].

Fig. 2. Interdependence of governance transformations, based on initial theory
by Patterson et al., (2016). Types of transformation in governance exist as an
interdependent cycle.
5

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

Often, it is not clear specifically what is meant by fundamental,
dramatic, radical or profound, but it invokes the perception of the need
to tackle deep rooted and systemic issues [71]. From an etymological
perspective, radical comes from ‘root’ [71], and as such invites a closer
re-evaluation of what values, assumptions, and power structures the
governance system is built upon [21]. This emphasis and awareness of
the need to address roots is not universal across interpretations of
transformation. In the context of ocean governance, it is difficult to
identify what the roots to be changed are. This is a major challenge to
transformation; the multiple and multiscalar interpretations of root
causes of crises make a consensus driven approach to change difficult,
and could risk delaying action. In addition, such divergence of inter­
pretation stresses the deeply political nature of transformations, which
cannot be ignored. Furthermore, whether a change is fundamental,
dramatic or profound is inherently subjective [22] which increases the
risk of being used to greenwash change [24].
The inclusion of such fundamental depth of change is not standard in
STS definitions of transformation. While some (notably Kelly et al. [44])
include the radical nature of change needed, many included the char­
acteristics of reorganisation and reconfiguring. This more practical
interpretation of transformation has gained some traction in global
policy, and has been explored in the context of global ocean governance.
Rudolph et al., [63] argue that a “purposeful transition” in oceans
governance can lead to transformation through incremental change.
An area of significant conceptual divergence is the dichotomy of
incremental versus radical change [13,72]. Incremental changes can be
characterised in different ways. In a general SES framing, incremental
can mean a reliance on current and normative “ways of thinking and
governance structures” to change the existing system [6]. In contrast,
from an adaptive perspective, incremental change can also be inter­
preted as small scale, slow, stepwise change in the short-term which
directly contrasts with a notion of large scale, system wide and rapid
change [72]. Incremental change is also strongly associated with
adaptation [53]. This plurality of meaning masks whether radical
change relates to depth, speed or scale or a combination of all three. In
this section, the former framing is adopted, and the discussion of radical
change relating to speed is continued in Section 3.3.
From a transition perspective, incremental change is observed
through the development of niche level changes which aggregate to
change at a landscape or regime level. Exploratory work by Rudolph
et al., [63] identifies several niche level changes that have capacity to
aggregate to transformative change in ocean governance. These incre­
mental changes often exist in specific sectoral responses to existing
drivers of change, such as efforts to decarbonise the shipping sector
[63]. Significant risks are identified with adopting an incremental
approach however, such as the disconnect between the emphasis on
radical change by the global scientific community and the incremental
policies proposed by implementing institutions [7,58]. Confining policy
and actions to those “accommodated by the existing system” to such
incremental change risks wasting valuable time [58]. Incremental
change is often susceptible to path dependency, and is a
well-documented barrier to incremental change [81]. Radical change
could have the potential to overcome such a barrier.
However, there is also significant criticism of a radical approach.
Radical change presumes that there is total knowledge and confidence
that the direction of change is correct, the eventual and unequivocal
success of interventions, and does not reflect the fact that there is still an
“incremental understanding of transformation processes themselves”
([13], p. 24). Brand [13] also outlines the tension between radical
problem diagnoses and ‘docile’ solutions proposed, and the inherent
flaw in assuming that transformation can be achieved with current
structures and systems. This is cognizant with the differentiation of
stages of governance of transformation identified by Patterson et al.,
[59], and the recognition that to facilitate transformation in governance,
governance systems themselves must transform to create enabling con­
ditions for change (outlined previously in Section 3.2). Therefore, it can

be summarised that any transformative effort within ocean governance
can only be achieved through a transformative change in governance.
Additionally, “too rapid and drastic change can easily lead to losses,
instability and confusion” ([52], p. 355), and lead to inequitable out­
comes and processes. Adopting an incremental approach can allow for
‘small wins’ in this regard, and in theory could support an inclusive and
equitable process. However, there is little evidence to support this logic
in practice. Furthermore, incremental change, if limited by path de­
pendency, could risk further entrenching existing interests and
inequality.
[23] suggests that the “general idea of transformation as a major,
fundamental change, as opposed to minor, marginal, or incremental
change, appears to be widely agreed upon in both research and policy.”
However, based on the findings of this review so far, we reject this hy­
pothesis and instead argue that such a binary perspective of change is
not constructive. In ocean governance, both forms of change are needed.
A recent development in literature is the exploration and reconceptu­
alization of the incremental versus radical debate towards a process that
sees both processes as interdependent [15,72]. Such a reconceptuali­
zation would lie between radical and incremental processes, and
potentially sees transformation as a continuous process that includes
incremental and radical shifts. The concept of continuous trans­
formational change as a compromise between the incremental and the
radical [72] has some merit in this regard. As advocated by Fazey et al.,
[22], a move beyond over-simplified distinctions of incremental and
radical, and the adoption of a more context specific approach that ad­
dresses the depth, breadth and speed of change is required.
Leverage points from an STS perspective are useful tools for under­
standing depths of changes towards transformative change, and repre­
sent areas of influence which can result in system wide change [49].
Depth of change in this context can range from shallow interventions,
such as financial incentives, to deeper interventions, such as changing
power structures, goals and visions of a system [1].
3.3. Speed
Speed of change is often not explicitly addressed in definitions of
transformation [72], and represents an avenue of exploration.
Depending on theoretical background, transformation could be an in­
cremental, adaptive process facilitated by reflexive learning and course
correction, or it could be a rapid and spontaneous event driven by the
passing of an external shock event [53]. Regardless, when discussing
speed of transformation, it is clear understanding the perceived drivers
of change are imperative in identifying the process and characteristics of
change [23].
It has been suggested that transformation implies the need for rapid
change [22], particularly given the urgency of response to multiple
nested crises [80]. Beyond the interpretation of incremental change as
slower and more step-wise change, there is little contrasting opinion in
literature. In the context of ocean governance, Rudolph et al., [63]
characterises transformation as needing to be rapid and nimble.
[59] sees the interdependency of incremental and radical change
temporally driven a focus on long-term transformation with “an honest
recognition of the realities of near-term incrementalism at the same
time.” Such short term incrementalism can also create momentum for
long term and larger scale change by advocating for ‘small wins’ [14,33,
59]. This also creates space for multiple pathways of transformation that
“intersect, overlap and conflict in unpredictable ways” ([65], p. 21). The
resulting cross-scale confluence of processes can also be trans­
formational [51], resulting in the need for a coevolutionary and multi­
disciplinary approach [59]. While urgent change is clearly advocated
for, it must not undermine reflexivity and reflection necessary to create
any depth or permanence of meaningful of change. The trade-offs be­
tween rapid and slow (or radical and incremental according to some
interpretations) warrants further critical attention.
6

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

4. Synthesis and conclusions

and vision-oriented outcomes rather than a reliance and use of goals and
objectives [22].
When proposing a definition of transformation, there is an inherent
tension between the need for a clear definition to avoid greenwashing,
simply repeating what has been defined previously, and the limitations
that are necessarily imposed through such a definition. As such, through
the evaluation of different interpretations of transformation, it must be
questioned if proposing an interpretation of transformation at the scale
of ocean governance is desirable. As identified above, the diversity of
interpretations of transformation has facilitated a plurality of meaning,
whereby very different attributes of change can fall under the umbrella
of transformation.
Similar to the findings of Voyer et al., [78] in the analysis of in­
terpretations of the blue economy, this review suggests that any uniform
definition may “result in particular lens being privileged, and undermine
the ability of states or regions to develop a more contextualized Blue
Economy which is sensitive to the aspirations and objectives of their
communities.” Therefore, transformation should adopt a conceptually
‘elastic’ perspective that is heavily contextually dependent [23] but
grounded in the need for deep and radical change. Furthermore,
consistent with the assertion that definitions of transformation reflect
contextual and situational nuance, it is important that through empirical
exploration and grounding any plan, model or definition generated in
the context of transformative scholarship is not a “blueprint” for trans­
formation ([46], p. 188). Blueprints in this context imply static narrative
of change which is at odds with these findings. Reconciling this elastic
approach with the need to generate a definition of transformation that is
specific enough to be clearly identified and measured against is chal­
lenging, and needs to result in a definition that can be applicable to
diverse contexts.
From this review, the following definition of transformation in ocean
governance is proposed: systemic change that addresses the roots of
persistent problems and results in a fundamentally different system. This
definition does not seek to prescribe what must change, and instead
advocates for an entire system change that is facilitated by the radical
reassessment of underlying values and assumptions, as facilitated by an
evaluation of the roots of change. While the utility of addressing roots of
persistent problems is contemplated above, it is ultimately concluded
that while the reflection and debate required to identify such roots
would facilitate a deeper and more robust level of change across a
breadth of system dynamics. In addition, addressing persistent problems
inspires a more practical approach to problem solving, and is understood
across a variety of contexts. In this regard, space is allowed for multiple
transformations to grow and shape transformative processes. This defi­
nition is similar to that proposed by Blythe et al., [11], but instead
targets transformation at the hidden elements of governance rather than
“structures, processes, rules and norms.”

4.1. An interpretation of transformation
This review began with the baseline of a “surprising and discon­
certing” lack of literature and knowledge surrounding transformation
[53]. Based on the findings of this review, this statement is rejected. In
the decade of scholarship since this assertion, transformation has un­
dergone a deep growth and maturation as field resulting in a largely
uniform understanding that transformation is radical, profound, and
fundamental change regardless of the process by which this is achieved.
The various theoretical framings of STS and SES have led to different
understandings of scale and breadth, but depth remains constant. What
is unacknowledged in these discussions of depth of transformation is
how these are dependent on internal values of those evaluating change.
Simply, what is radical to one may be superficial to another. Therefore,
it is critical to reflect on who is calling for transformation, and how this
shapes the resultant trajectory and narrative of change [11].
From these findings, it can therefore be summarised that to achieve
such deep systemic change as is common to most definitions, trans­
formation cannot be relegated to the surface, and must result in a system
that is unrecognisably different to what preceded it. However, there are
significant practical challenges associated with such change, and limited
empirical evidence of such transformations having been achieved
particularly in the context of ocean governance. Future research could
identify and analyse historic examples of such change, and what driving
and enabling factors facilitated such deep change.
Beyond the inclusion of specific focuses of change, Nalau and
Handmer [52] found that many definitions of transformation do not
include consideration of the scale and endurability of transformation.
This was also observed in this review, with definitions often stating the
need for generic ‘system-change.’ Without a solid appreciation of which
system is the target of change, systems change is a concept that promises
much but delivers little tangible direction as to where transformative
efforts should be focused. It is proposed through this review that
transformation, particularly for ocean sustainability, should be targeted
at governance systems. This position agrees with the perspective of
Blythe et al., [11], who advocate for an ocean governance trans­
formation. While the importance of multi-scale transformation cannot
be understated, this review advocates that a focus on governance can
facilitate transformation across multiple scales.
4.2. Moving beyond granularity
It is suggested here that transformative literature is often viewed in
too granular and siloed a fashion to see the broader understandings of
change. Moving beyond this granularity, and beyond dichotomies of
incremental and radical and SES and STS, into a broader and more in­
tegrated understanding of change would majorly benefit operationali­
sation of transformation in ocean governance. For example, exploring
how niche innovation in transition theories, as described by Rudolph
et al., [63], could be applied in the context of the Olsson Framework of
transformations in SES in an ocean governance context [10]. Additional
research could review organisational change management-centric ap­
proaches to social dynamics of transformation, and how these could be
translated to larger and more complex governance systems. Observa­
tions of the practical implementation of such theoretical framings of
transformations of governance transformations in reality would test
whether such an integration is observed in practice.
It is recognised that transformation has plurality of meaning across
different domains of knowledge [18]. The subjectivity and fuzziness of
this term is in equal parts its strength and weakness. On the one hand, it
inspires creative, rapid and unlimited capacity for change, and on the
other can be used to describe minor ‘greenwashed’ changes that do not
facilitate the depth required of transformative change [22]. The ‘fuzzi­
ness’ of transformation often stems from the existing system complexity

4.3. Conclusions
In conclusion, it is clear that well established theories of trans­
formation exist, with significant differences relating to what constitutes
a transformation in relation to speed, and scale. Depth of change re­
mains relatively constant across definitions. A largely consistent un­
derstanding that transformation is radical, profound, and fundamental
change highlights further questions as to what exactly these concepts
look like in practice. It is still not clear how these different character­
istics of transformation can be applied to transformative change in ocean
governance, representing an area of future research that seeks to oper­
ationalise these terms, or ground them in reality.
These differences in characterisation are simultaneously a virtue and
challenge to implementation of the concept, with plurality of in­
terpretations necessary when navigating complex issues, yet also
potentially shelter a business-as-usual status-quo. This conceptual
malleability represents a significant challenge for policy and imple­
mentation in pursuit of transformation to meet global challenges
7

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

identified in the introduction. As such, caution is advised when using
transformation as a policy objective, with clarity in what exactly is
meant being paramount.
In light of this plurality and the practical challenges associated with
such malleability, this review has generated a holistic and multidisciplinary interpretation of transformation in the context of ocean
governance, which aims to begin to bridge these theoretical silos to­
wards a unified understanding of transformation. This now needs to be
refined through practical application and reflection. From this defini­
tion, and its focus on persistent problems, the question of how trans­
formation is undertaken is more contextually driven and nuanced than
prescriptive.

[16] B.C. Chaffin, et al., ‘Transformative environmental governance (Available at),
Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 41 (2016) 399–423, https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-environ-110615-085817.
[17] J. Colding, S. Barthel, Exploring the social-ecological systems discourse 20 years
later (Available at), Ecol. Soc. 24 (1) (2019), 240102, https://doi.org/10.5751/ES10598-240102.
[18] D. Davelaar, Transformation for sustainability: a deep leverage points approach
(Available at), Sustain. Sci. 16 (3) (2021) 727–747, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11625-020-00872-0.
[19] S. Díaz, et al., Pervasive human-driven decline of life on Earth points to the need
for transformative change (Available at), Science 366 (6471) (2019), https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aax3100.
[20] B. Erinosho, et al., Transformative governance for ocean biodiversity’, Transform.
Biodivers. Gov. (2021) (Available at), 〈https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract
=3853886〉.
[21] J. Eshuis, L. Gerrits, The limited transformational power of adaptive governance: a
study of institutionalization and materialization of adaptive governance (Available
at), Public Manag. Rev. 23 (2) (2021) 276–296, https://doi.org/10.1080/
14719037.2019.1679232.
[22] I. Fazey, et al., Transformation in a changing climate: a research agenda (Available
at), Clim. Dev. 10 (3) (2018) 197–217, https://doi.org/10.1080/
17565529.2017.1301864.
[23] G. Feola, Societal transformation in response to global environmental change: A
review of emerging concepts (Available at), Ambio 44 (5) (2015) 376–390, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13280-014-0582-z.
[24] G. Feola, O. Koretskaya, D. Moore, (Un)making in sustainability transformation
beyond capitalism’ (Available at), Glob. Environ. Change 69 (June) (2021),
102290, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102290.
[25] Fischer-Kowalski, M. and Rotmans, J. (2019) ‘Conceptualizing, Observing, and
Influencing Social – Ecological Transitions’, 14(2).
[26] C. Folke, et al., Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience, adaptability and
transformability (Available at), Ecol. Soc. 15 (4) (2010), https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-03610-150420.
[27] L. Fries, J. Everett, N. Davies, Transformational opportunities for people, ocean and
planet (Available at), Blue Clim. Initiat., Tetiaroa Soc. (2021), https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.4540323.
[28] F.W. Geels, et al., Sociotechnical transitions for deep decarbonization, Science 357
(6357) (2017) 1242–1244.
[29] F.W. Geels, J. Schot, Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways (Available at),
Res. Policy 36 (3) (2007) 399–417, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2007.01.003.
[30] S. Gelcich, et al., Navigating transformations in governance of Chilean marine
coastal resources (Available at), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107 (39) (2010)
16794–16799, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1012021107.
[31] L.C. Gerhardinger, et al., Crafting a sustainability transition experiment for the
brazilian blue economy (Available at), Mar. Policy 120 (August) (2020), https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104157.
[32] R. Gillard, et al., ‘Transformational responses to climate change: Beyond a systems
perspective of social change in mitigation and adaptation’ (Available at), WIREs
Clim. Change 7 (2) (2016) 251–265, https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.384.
[33] M. Gopel, The Great Mindshift: How a New Economic Paradigm and Sustainability
Transformations go Hand in Hand, Springer Nature,, 2016, https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-43766-8.
[34] B. Haas, et al., The future of ocean governance, Rev. Fish. Biol. Fish. (2021),
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11160-020-09631-x.
[35] D. Hausknost, The environmental state and the glass ceiling of transformation
(Available at), Environ. Polit. 29 (1) (2019) 17–37, https://doi.org/10.1080/
09644016.2019.1680062.
[36] D. Hausknost, M. Hammond, Beyond the environmental state? The political
prospects of a sustainability transformation (Available at), Environ. Polit. 29 (1)
(2020) 1–16, https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2020.1686204.
[37] K. Hölscher, J.M. Wittmayer, D. Loorbach, Transition versus transformation:
What’s the difference? (Available at), Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 27 (2018) 1–3,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2017.10.007.
[38] M. Hulme, Why We Disagree about Climate Change: Understanding Controversy.
Inaction and Opportunity, Cambridge University Press,, 2009.
[39] E. Hysing, R. Lidskog, Do conceptual innovations facilitate transformative change?
The case of biodiversity governance (Available at), Front. Ecol. Evol. 8 (2021)
1–13, https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2020.612211.
[40] IPBES (2019) ‘Annex I: Glossary of the Global assessment report on biodiversity
and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services’. Available at: https://doi.org/10.5281/
ZENODO.5657079.
[41] J.-B. Jouffray, et al., The blue acceleration: the trajectory of human expansion into
the ocean (Available at), One Earth 2 (1) (2020) 43–54, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
oneear.2019.12.016.
[42] R.W. Kates, W.R. Travis, T.J. Wilbanks, Transformational adaptation when
incremental adaptations to climate change are insufficient (Available at), Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109 (19) (2012) 7156–7161, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1115521109.
[43] C. Kelly, G. Ellis, W. Flannery, Conceptualising change in marine governance:
Learning from Transition Management (Available at), Mar. Policy 95 (June) (2018)
24–35, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.06.023.
[44] C. Kelly, G. Ellis, W. Flannery, Unravelling persistent problems to transformative
marine governance (Available at), Front. Mar. Sci. 6 (APR) (2019), https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmars.2019.00213.

Funding
This research was funded by bursary from the University of
Portsmouth.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Tegan Evans: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – original
draft, Writing - Review & Editing. Steve Fletcher: Supervision,
Conceptualization, Writing - Review & Editing. Pierre Failler: Super­
vision, Conceptualization, Writing - Review & Editing. Jonathan Potts:
Supervision Conceptualization, Writing - Review & Editing.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] D.J. Abson, et al., Leverage points for sustainability transformation (Available at),
Ambio 46 (1) (2017) 30–39, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-016-0800-y.
[2] S. Andrew, L. Armstrong, A. Birney, Governance – the overlooked route to
transformation: How can we best organise for change? Forum Future (2021)
(Available at), 〈https://www.thefuturescentre.org/governance-the-overlooked-r
oute-to-transformation-how-can-we-best-organise-for-change/〉.
[3] M. Andriamahefazafy, et al., Sustainable development goal 14: To what degree
have we achieved the 2020 targets for our oceans? (Available at), Ocean Coast.
Manag. 227 (January) (2022), 106273, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ocecoaman.2022.106273.
[4] D. Armitage, M. Marschke, T. van Tuyen, Early-stage transformation of coastal
marine governance in Vietnam? (Available at), Mar. Policy 35 (5) (2011) 703–711,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2011.02.011.
[5] F. Avelino, et al., The politics of sustainability transitions (Available at), J. Environ.
Policy Plan. 18 (5) (2016) 557–567, https://doi.org/10.1080/
1523908X.2016.1216782.
[6] N.J. Bennett, et al., Just transformations to sustainability (Available at),
Sustainability 11 (14) (2019) 1–18, https://doi.org/10.3390/su11143881.
[7] F. Biermann, et al., Transforming governance and institutions for global
sustainability: Key insights from the Earth System Governance Project (Available
at), Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 4 (1) (2012) 51–60, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cosust.2012.01.014.
[8] F. Biermann, et al., Scientific evidence on the political impact of the sustainable
development goals (Available at), Nat. Sustain (2022), https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41893-022-00909-5.
[9] J. Blythe, et al., The dark side of transformation: latent risks in contemporary
sustainability discourse (Available at), Antipode 50 (5) (2018) 1206–1223, https://
doi.org/10.1111/anti.12405.
[10] J. Blythe, D. Armitage, et al., Conditions and cautions for transforming ocean
governance (Available at), Water Resil. (2021) 241–261, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-48110-0.
[11] J. Blythe, Nathan James Bennett, et al., The politics of ocean governance
transformations (Available at), Front. Mar. Sci. 8 (July) (2021), https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmars.2021.634718.
[12] M. Bogers, et al., The impact of the Sustainable Development Goals on a network of
276 international organizations (Available at), Glob. Environ. Change 76 (2022),
102567, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2022.102567.
[13] U. Brand, Transformation" as a new critical orthodoxy: The strategic use of the
term “transformation” does not prevent multiple crises (Available at), Gaia 25 (1)
(2016) 23–27, https://doi.org/10.14512/gaia.25.1.7.
[14] Bulkeley, H. et al. (2020) Moving towards transformative change for biodiversity:
harnessing the potential of the Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework, p. 48.
[15] S. Burch, et al., New directions in earth system governance research (Available at),
Earth Syst. Gov. 1 (2019), 100006, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esg.2019.100006.

8

T. Evans et al.

Marine Policy 155 (2023) 105710

[45] Kok, M. et al. (2022) ‘Enabling Transformative Biodiversity Governance in the
Post-2020 Era’, in, pp. 341–360. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781108856348.017.
[46] B.-O. Linnér, V. Wibeck, Sustainability Transformations Across Societies: Agents
and Drivers across Societies, Cambridge University Press,, 2019.
[47] B. McAteer, W. Flannery, Power, knowledge and the transformative potential of
marine community science’ (Available at), Ocean Coast. Manag. 218 (2022),
106036, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2022.106036.
[48] T. McPhearson, et al., Radical changes are needed for transformations to a good
Anthropocene (Available at), npj Urban Sustain. 1 (1) (2021), https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42949-021-00017-x.
[49] D. Meadows, Thinking in Systems: A Primer, Earthscan,, 2009.
[50] D. Meadows, J. Randers, D. Meadows, Limits to Growth: The 30-Year Update.
White River Junction, Chelsea Green,, VT, 2004.
[51] M.L. Moore, et al., Studying the complexity of change: Toward an analytical
framework for understanding deliberate social-ecological transformations
(Available at), Ecol. Soc. 19 (4) (2014), https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-06966190454.
[52] J. Nalau, J. Handmer, When is transformation a viable policy alternative (Available
at), Environ. Sci. Policy 54 (2015) 349–356, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2015.07.022.
[53] K. O’Brien, Global environmental change II: From adaptation to deliberate
transformation (Available at), Prog. Hum. Geogr. 36 (5) (2012) 667–676, https://
doi.org/10.1177/0309132511425767.
[54] K. O’Brien, Is the 1.5◦ C target possible? Exploring the three spheres of
transformation (Available at), Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 31 (2018) 153–160,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2018.04.010.
[55] P. Olsson, C. Folke, T. Hahn, Social-ecological transformation for ecosystem
management: The development of adaptive co-management of a wetland landscape
in southern Sweden (Available at), Ecol. Soc. 9 (4) (2004), https://doi.org/
10.5751/ES-00683-090402.
[56] Open Ended Working Group on the Post 202 Global Biodiversity Framework
(2021) ‘First Draft of the Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework’. CBD.
Available at: https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/abb5/591f/
2e46096d3f0330b08ce87a45/wg2020-03-03-en.pdf.
[57] S.E. Park, et al., Informing adaptation responses to climate change through theories
of transformation (Available at), Glob. Environ. Change 22 (1) (2012) 115–126,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.10.003.
[58] U. Pascual, et al., Governing for transformative change across the biodiversity –
climate – society nexus, BioScience 72 (7) (2022) 684–704.
[59] J. Patterson, et al., Exploring the governance and politics of transformations
towards sustainability (Available at), Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 24 (2017) 1–16,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2016.09.001.
[60] M. Pelling, K. O’Brien, D. Matyas, Adaptation and transformation (Available at),
Clim. Change 133 (1) (2015) 113–127, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-0141303-0.
[61] Pretlove, B. and Blasiak, R. (2018) Mapping Ocean Governance and Regulation.
[62] W.S. Rice, M.R. Sowman, M. Bavinck, Using Theory of Change to improve post2020 conservation: A proposed framework and recommendations for use
(Available at), Conserv. Sci. Pract. 2 (12) (2020) 1–17, https://doi.org/10.1111/
csp2.301.
[63] T.B. Rudolph, et al., A transition to sustainable ocean governance (Available at),
Nat. Commun. 11 (1) (2020) 1–14, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17410-2.
[64] J.D. Sachs, et al., Six transformations to achieve the sustainable development goals
(Available at), Nat. Sustain. (2019) 805–814, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893019-0352-9.

[65] I. Scoones, M. Leach, P. Newell, The Politics of Green Transformations, Routledge,,
2015.
[66] Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2020) Global Biodiversity
Outlook 5. Montreal.
[67] Shove, E. (2010) ‘Social theory and climate change: Questions often, sometimes
and not yet asked’, Theory, Culture and Society, 27(2), pp. 277–288. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276410361498.
[68] A. Stirling, Emancipating Transformations, in: I. Scoones, M. Leach, P. Newell
(Eds.), The Politics of Green Transformations, Routledge, 2015, pp. 54–67.
[69] T. Stojanovic, K. Gee, ‘Governance as a framework to theorise and evaluate marine
planning’ (Available at), Mar. Policy 120 (2020), 104115, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104115.
[70] Swilling, M. et al. (2020) ‘The Ocean Transition: What to Learn from System
Transitions’, p. 66.
[71] L. Temper, et al., A perspective on radical transformations to sustainability:
resistances, movements, alternatives, Sustain. Sci. 13 (2018).
[72] C.J.A.M. Termeer, A. Dewulf, G.R. Biesbroek, Transformational change:
governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a continuous change
perspective (Available at), J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 60 (4) (2017) 558–576,
https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
[73] TWI2050, Transformations to Achieve the Sustainable Development Goals - Report
prepared by The World in 2050 initiative. International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA),,
Laxenburg, Austria, 2018, https://doi.org/10.22022/TNT/07-2018.15347.
[74] United Nations Environment Programme (2021) Making Peace With Nature.
[75] J. Virdin, et al., The Ocean 100: Transnational corporations in the ocean economy
(Available at), Sci. Adv. 7 (3) (2021) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.
abc8041.
[76] Visseren-Hamakers, I. et al. (2022) ‘How to Save a Million Species? Transformative
Governance through Prioritization’, in, pp. 67–90. Available at: https://doi.org/
10.1017/9781108856348.005.
[77] Visseren-Hamakers, I.J. and Kok, M.T.J. (2022) ‘The Urgency ofTransforming
Biodiversity Governance’, in I.J. Visseren-Hamakers and M. Kok (eds)
Transforming Biodiversity Governance, pp. 3–21.
[78] M. Voyer, et al., Shades of blue: what do competing interpretations of the Blue
Economy mean for oceans governance? (Available at), J. Environ. Policy Plan. 20
(5) (2018) 595–616, https://doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2018.1473153.
[79] B. Walker, et al., Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–ecological
systems (Available at), Ecol. Soc. 9 (2) (2004), https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.95.258101.
[80] D. Weaver, et al., Pragmatic engagement with the wicked tourism problem of
climate change through “ soft ” transformative governance, Tourism Management
93 (May) (2022), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2022.104573.
[81] L. Werbeloff, R.R. Brown, D. Loorbach, Pathways of system transformation:
Strategic agency to support regime change (Available at), Environ. Sci. Policy 66
(2016) 119–128, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2016.08.010.
[82] F. Westley, et al., A theory of transformative agency in linked social-ecological
systems (Available at), Ecol. Soc. 18 (3) (2013), https://doi.org/10.5751/ES05072-180327.
[83] G. Ziervogel, A. Cowen, J. Ziniades, Moving from adaptive to transformative
capacity: Building foundations for inclusive, thriving, and regenerative urban
settlements (Available at), Sustainability 8 (9) (2016), https://doi.org/10.3390/
su8090955.

9

